This file has only the full contents of each the preliminary/auxiliary practices, as opposed to just their names. The file

auxiliary_names_only.txt

contains just the names of the preliminary/auxiliary practices. The section

[...]
practice
	[...]
	solo practice
		preliminary/auxiliary practices
		[...]
	[...]
[...]

contains information on what the preliminary/auxiliary practices are and how to use them.



do less:

If you happen to find yourself doing something, and you can stop doing it, and it’s ok or good to stop doing it, then allow this stopping to happen or participate in that stopping happening.

[This prelim/aux practice, and many of the others, are intended to be done while sitting quietly, but they can be adapted to other contexts.]


sense now:

Deliberately, in ways that are ok or good and safe, attend to and be aware of, consciously experience, sensations as such and know that that’s what you’re doing while you’re doing it.


sense meta:

* If you happen to remember to try to do so, effortlessly rest in already effortlessly being aware of being aware [sic] of sensation(s) as such as it’s/they’re vividly and veridically happening right now.
* Said more pithily, be aware of being aware.
* Or, perhaps more accurately and evocatively, without having to fully parse the first bullet, be aware of being aware of what you’re being aware of. [sic]


blend:

For a feared possibly true thing, if it’s safe enough and good enough to do so, be like what if that really/actually *is* true? Really play it up, get behind it, prime the pump, try to convince yourself it is indeed true, reach for your best feel of that really being true, allow yourself to fall into the world where it is true, take that leap and ride the wave wherever it takes you.


unblend:

Be, like, huh, that’s funny, huh that seems weird, huh why do/did I think that?


be moved:

To the degree you can allow yourself, to the degree you feel it’s safe or safe enough to be moved, to just find yourself doing/moving/vocalizing/twitching/acting/dramatizing/being/expressing/enacting/reenacting/feeling/dreaming/wanting/desiring/indulging, and to allow it to continue, to go with it, to go with the flow of it, do so.


have experience:

As it is ok to be lost in movement, thought, or reverie. It’s also ok to be lost in sensation as it happens, e.g. in music or visual beauty or conversation or sex or other sensuality, etc. And it’s also ok if you can’t do this or it never (yet) happens.


feel your body:

Thus.


feel your feelings:

Thus.


relax muscles:

Thus or e.g. experiment with “progressive relaxation.”


feel more:

Explore ways to change your posture, relax your muscles, let your chest and torso and stomach soften, etc., in a way that facilitates feeling your feelings and body sensations more easily or possibly more intensely and to possibly have more sensations become present.


feel what feels good and bad and neutral:

Deliberately seek out positively valenced feelings and/or other sensations. Deliberately seek out negatively valenced feelings and/or other sensations. Deliberately seek out neutrally valenced or unvalenced sensations.


explore what you (seem to) know, understand, expect, and remember:

Explore what you know. Explore your understanding of things. Explore your memories. 


put things into words, slowly, and maybe revise:

Thus; And consider writing by hand when you’re doing this.


say or think truth:

Verbalize a seemingly relevant seeming truth. [sic] Repeat.


explore *how* you’re thinking:

Thus.


explore *how* you’re believing:

Thus.


explore *how* you’re expecting:

Thus.


attend to things and sensations:

Thus.


imagine:

Imagine or simulate something, involving the use of visual imagery, if possible.


move grossly the “attention/thinking” muscles:

Deliberately move your eyes, jaw, tongue, head/neck, glottis, lips, palate.


notice and light move/influence the subtle “attention/thinking” muscles:

Notice, and possibly lightly influence subtle muscle activity and subtle sensation of the eyes, jaw, tongue, back of the neck, back of the head, glottis, lips, palate.


interrupt thought:

Interrupt or suppress thought or other mental activity, or catch it/them before it/they start(s) via (smooth/abrupt switching to) attending to things/objects or sensations or awareness of now or the present moment as such/being in the moment. Interleave or switch between thinking/imagining/reverie, interrupting thought, attending to locations on or in the body, and feeling your feelings.


be breathed:

Release the voluntary component of your breathing as much as possible and let involuntary breathing take over.


interrupt anything:

Interrupt, suppress, distract from, switch from an emotion, a response, a reaction, a feeling, an urge, an impulse, a craving/thirst, a thought, inner verbalizing, reverie, automaticity, movement, an intention, a train of thought, pursuit of a particular goal, a local plan, attention to a sensation…


concentrate perfectly on something:

Pick a sensory object, e.g. a visual patch, and reflectively attend to it. Don’t just look; see. Don’t just touch; feel. Don’t just listen; hear, etc. Notice subtle or gross wavering or interjection.


be here, now:

Thus and notice subtle or gross wavering or interjection.


just this:

Incline towards in the seeing, just the seen; in the hearing, just the heard, etc.


do deliberately:

Do something deliberately.


meaning-making:

Consider or say something, anything new. Or experience what comes prior to that, liminally verbally or completely nonverbally.


meaning-dissolving:

Find something that was true, meaningful, or coherent, that becomes untrue or nonsensical when you consider it anew or when reflectively considered for this first time.


fill-in-the-blank:

Create or find a sentence, assertion, or statement with a blank. Incline towards filling in the blank.


wonder about something:

Thus.


pose a question:

Pose a complete, well-formed question. You might right write it down and refine it.


incline towards answering a question:

Pick a well-formed question. Incline towards answering it.


find a disendorsed belief:

Find and be aware of a batshit crazy, schizophrenic, ugly, mean, fantastical, from childhood belief or “seeming-ness” that you’d rather not have/believe/experience. For now, just allow it to be or see if it naturally changes.


notice yourself talking to yourself:

Notice yourself talking to yourself, the reminding, convincing, suggesting, denying, etc. For now, just allow it to be or see if it naturally changes.


notice the experience of other-ness:

Notice other/alien/foreign/friend/enemy/parental/sibling/group/communal/cultural/global voices and impulses in you.


notice “feared truth”:

Notice a “feared truth” (or the “shadow” of one), something that would be terribly bad or would have terribly bad implications or ramifications if it were (definitely/decisively/actually) true.


reason with yourself:

Agnostically, impartially, gently, infinitely patiently, non-coercively reason or dialogue with yourself.


jump:

Attend to a “random” spot on or in the body.


sequence:

Attend to a “random” sequence of spots on and/or in the body, the sensory surround, or knowing or meaning or anything.


bodymind talks:

Allow words to come, ideally without presupposition or preconception. Let the bodymind talk to you.


explain something:

Explain how something works to yourself, to a rubber duck, to another person.


the beginning of explanation:

About something, ask, what explains this? How did this come to be, and, what’s going on, here?


purposefulness:

About something you’re doing/feeling/experiencing or you intend to do, ask, for what purpose am I doing this? For what purpose is this happening (to me)?


articulation:

Try to put something inchoate into words. When you have some words, see if they fit, and see if there are parts which don’t have words for which you need to find more words.


single word:

See if you can find the right, single word for something.


subtle and fast:

See if you can find a place in you, on you, or outside of you where your sensations are subtle and fast-changing.


hard to attend to:

Notice where it’s hard to pay attention. Don’t force yourself to pay attention there, right now.


problem and solution:

Pick a problem you have and try to come up with a solution in any way that comes to you to try.


be there for yourself:

Thus, and, whatever you need, try to give it to yourself, directly, right now, in the right way.


be there for yourself, age-appropriately:

Thus, and, whatever you need, try to give it to yourself, directly, right now, in the right way. And, try to take into account any felt age, how old the relevant parts of you feel, any feeling-of-being-there sense or memory.


be a mother, father, big brother, big sister, mentor, teacher, most-trusted-friend-to-yourself, age-appropriately:

Thus, and, whatever you need, be the person that can give you the right thing, directly, right now, in the right way, and do so as best you can. And, try to take into account any felt age, how old the relevant parts of you feel, any feeling-of-being-there sense or memory. If safe, perhaps they know exactly what you’re thinking and feeling, and can respond exactly appropriately with exactly what you need.


counterfactual resourcing:

Alongside what actually happened, imagine a better version of a memory. How could it have gone in some other world (that ultimately, downstream, might provide you with exactly what you need right now)? Let it be complementary to the original memory or experience in sense and fidelity. Explore what, in some other world, could have been the best possible age-appropriate you, immersively there, then.


counterfactual avoidance:

Alongside something bad that actually happened, as best you understand it, how could you have avoided that? Or, how would that not have happened, had you only know… what?


imaginary conversation:

Imagine a conversation between two people, complete with possibly hazy setting and dialogue.


imaginary self-insert conversation:

Imagine you’re dialoging/conversing with someone, about whatever topics you’re drawn to.


planning:

Explore planning or your plans.


goals:

Explore goal setting or your goals.


todo lists:

Explore your physical or mental todo list(s) or explore what might go on one.


ideal day:

Concretely imagine how you’d spend a “normal ideal day.”


positive and negative motivation and evaluation:

Explore the objects and experiences of current and remembered

(a) thirst, craving, impulse, urge, appetite, motivation, “intrinsic motivation,” self-nudge, love, limerance, meaningfulness, hope, desire, longing, liking, loving, wishing, dreaming, lusting, wanting, desiring, needing, and

(b) that which is beautiful, wonderful, extraordinary, awe-inspiring, delicious, delectable, awesome, staggering, disarming, heavenly, divine, glorious, completing, be-all-end-all, the-whole-point, only-thing-that-matters, true-reason(s)-to-do-anything, elegant, sublime, hot, sexy, devastating-in-a-good-way, perfect, destined/fated/inevitable-in-a-good-way, satisfying, warming, fulfilling, relieving, engaging, likable, and

(c) that which is disgusting, evil, bad, hateful, gross, undesirable, horrible, terrible, unwanted, noxious, aversive, desperation-related, out-of-control-ness-related, dislikable.


inner conflict:

Explore current inner conflict, the goodness, the badness, the endorsement, the disendorsement, the good but feels bad, the bad that feels good, the bad that should feel good, the good that should feel bad, what hurts so good, what hurts so bad, what you want to want, what you want to not want…


inner confusion:

Explore current inner confusion.


self-soothe: (jd)

Reassure yourself. Hold yourself. Be gentle on/to yourself. Talk to or treat yourself like you might a young child.


relax: (jd)

Take deep breaths. Take it easy. Loosen up. Untense. Relaxxxxxxxx. 


think with your body: (jd)

Explore what it’s like to “think” while attending to or moving attention through your body.


live lightly: (jd)

Make yourself a cup of tea. Go for a walk in the neighborhood. Read a book on a porch on a sunny day


trust your body, trust your mind: (jd)

Trust that the thing that's currently/presently/ongoingly happening is the right thing. Trust that your body and mind know the best path forward. Follow its lead. Listen to its clues.


don’t run away from the present / explore the present / return to the present: (jd)

What is good or bad, right here, right now? What is going on, right here right now? What could be improved or better, right here right now? What could be tweaked or different, right here right now?


feel your feelings: (jd)

Let them move, shift, expand, spread. Let it flow. Let it flow through you. Allow it (all). Surrender to it. Fully fall into it (if it's safe to do so)


label: (jd)

Label (put words to) your experience. What’s happening? What's going on?


find good, find bad: (jd)

What is (presently, ongoingly) happening that is good or bad? What are you (presently, ongoingly) doing that is good or bad?


embrace nebulosity: (jd)

If it’s good to do so, lean-in-to/embrace the churn/uncertainty/not-knowing/intensity/confusion/ambiguity/unknowing/chaos/(meaninglessness?) of the ever changing flow of experience, whatever that might be or where it might go. Notice the aversion to doing so, and the impulse to retreat to the safe/reified/conceptual.


welcome experience: (jd)

Welcome, allow, accept, receive, let in, make space for, give breathing room to … whatever is happening in experience. 


examine avoidance: (jd)

Notice: is there anything you are currently/presently/ongoingly avoiding or running away from? If so: would it be good to not do so? are you able to not do so? is it safe to not do so?


do what feels good:

Thus.


patiently wait with what feels bad:

Thus.


patiently wait with “something’s bad but don’t know what or where”:

Thus.


uncrush crushed desires:

Thus.


physically dramatize, physically act out:

Thus.


explore the experience of masculine gendered power:

Thus.


explore the experience of feminine gendered power:

Thus.


explore the experience of feminine gendered intimacy/connection/compassion/warmth/love:

Thus.


explore the experience of masculine gendered intimacy/connection/compassion/warmth/love:

Thus.


explore childlike power:

Thus.


explore childlike playfulness:

Thus.


explore childlike connection, love, etc.:

Thus.


explore masculine gendered sensuality:

Thus.


explore feminine gendered sensuality:

Thus.


explore masculine gendered desire:

Thus.


explore feminine gendered desire:

Thus.


go crazy; dance, flail, yell, jump, fuck:

Thus.


explore not orgasming; explore magnifying sexual desire/arousal/motivation:

Thus.


do something all wrong; do something incorrectly:

Thus.


explore joy in another’s success or happiness:

Thus.


explore reluctance to forgive; explore grudgingness: 

Thus.


hang out with “chakras” and extremities:

Steadily attend, for a prolonged period of time (but not too long), to your hands, your feet, or (particularly your lower) “chakras”, near the surface or in the depths of your body: root/perineum, (sacrum), genitals, tan tien/dan tien, navel/hara, solar plexus, heart…


attend to nonsymbolic cognition:

What were you just thinking about, even if that thinking wasn’t in words? It was probably about something, real or imaginary.


attend in, on, or outside the body:

Decide whether you’ll attend to sensations inside, on, or outside the body. Then do just that for a bit.


just sit or stand, deliberately, reflectively, actively, with perfect posture:

Thus.


facilitate drive, motivation, grit; psych yourself up to *do*:

Thus.


plan with your whole body, not just your head:

Thus.


feel your plans/intentions/goals change (or not) in your body:

Thus.


change an intention, plan, or goal:

Thus. Change what you’re going to do, if you can (at this time). You might see if, unforcily, you can have the change be effortlessly, unreflectively stable, until you you fulfill it or it makes sense to modify it. (The change might be an addition, removal, or modification of an existing intention, plan, or goal.)


figure or dont:

Work on figuring something out. Or, do something besides, do you anything besides, figuring something out


do something without asking permission:

Thus.


be actually good to someone without their consent:

Thus.


solve or dissolve:

Explore whether you’re (a) altering your plans and intentions for changing the world or (b) altering your beliefs and desires to shape yourself to the world or (c) both, in this moment. (Note that (a), technically, is shaping yourself to the world as well.)


directness or indirectness:

Explore whether you can just directly go after something and have it, do it, be it, or achieve it. Or, are you planning, learning, preparing, etc. If you are doing the latter, why not the former?


explore a conflicted desire:

Thus; explore how bad if feels (for whatever reasons); explore how good it feels (for whatever reasons).


concretely imagine:

Imagine something in full, concrete detail, perhaps including first-person experience from a first-person perspective.


reminisce:

Thus.


desire backwards:

Follow the evolution of a desire backwards in time. “Float back” using a gradient of the feeling of that desire, the feeling of those times…


counterfactual desire:

Imagine what you would have wanted then had it been ok to elaboratively want it.


notice interjection:

Notice when thoughts or feelings come up that are against your “main forward direction.” Explore good and bad ways to interact with those interjections, e.g. ignore, befriend, tolerate, etc.


retrospective self-giving:

Imagine you’re giving your younger self exactly what they wanted and needed then; experience the “immersive feel” of this.


honor or respect all of your desires:

Thus, across all times, places, ages, parts of you.


notice distantly related yet contradictory desires:

Thus.


notice unreflective automaticity:

Thus, as if you are waking (to/)from a (lucid) dream.


pose questions to yourself:

Thus.


explore having two different things in mind simultaneously:

Thus.


what you want, you want:

Thus.


body agreement:

Before taking a physical or mental action, see first if the body agrees, and abide by any disagreement.


play games with symbols( e.g. words):

Thus.


question problem basis:

As a provisional alternative to trying to directly make something ok, through mind (thought) or action, try exploring the presuppositions and premises that make X not ok in the first place.


give up; let go; fail completely:

Thus. (if/when it’s safe and actually good to do so)


scan in, on, or outside the body (body scan; environmental scan):

Decide whether you’ll explore sensations inside, on, or outside the body. Then systematically/comprehensively do just that for a bit.


take a break:

Thus; do something completely different for at least three days, ideally without cheating/without exceptions.


watch for beginnings (of awareness of sensing and knowing):

Thus.


watch for endings (of awareness of sensations):

Thus.


watch for changes (in knowing/seeming/expecting):

Thus.


watch for “was there all along” experiences:

Thus.


watch for “real reasons (for doing/being/feeling)” (that were “previously just out of view”):

Thus.


quiet, stable, fine-grain examination:

As best you can, have a quiet and stable mind. Examine the changing of sensations (perhaps investigating momentary in a single place or “place”) at the finest grain of detail.


freewrite:

Without forcing, write or type whatever comes to mind, keep going. Make the word count as high as you can. Free-draw, free-anything.


parts:

Ask what a part of you or a thing in you is. Ask what it’s doing. Ask what it wants, what its purpose is, what it’s for. Ask yourself what’s good for you about that part or thing being there doing its thing. Ask it what it has that you yourself want or need? Ask yourself what good thing is it doing for you? You might temporarily release/drain your own will from that part or thing, let it do or be exactly what it wants, pretending or making it so you can’t directly affect or control it; and, then, as above/previously, only ask questions and make and follow suggestions, requests, and counteroffers.


goodness of badness:

Explore what’s good (or useful or necessary), if anything, about bad things, including feeling bad or being bad, in general and for particular badness.


soften:

Explore if you can become soft where you are currently hard.


chain questions:

Thus, that is, ask a question and use the answer to that question (or parts of that answer) in a new question, and repeat with that answer in a new question, and so forth.


beginnings and endings:

Look for beginnings and endings of presence (of experience) and absence (of experience). (ideally “minimally; without adding anything or taking anything away”)


stability and change:

Look for stability and change


explore symbolic mediation, lack thereof, and how you might take a break:

Look for how verbalizing, categorizing, symbolizing, organizing, listing, structuring, narrativizing, referencing might be getting in the way. See if you can temporarily set all that aside.


chose enjoyment:

When in doubt, choose the enjoyable option (and fully enjoy).


chose nonverbal:

When in doubt, choose the nonverbal/wordless option.


flesh out worlds:

Imagine how things might or actually be, even if you are uncertain as to whether those things are actually the case. Imagine more parts of the worlds you might be in.


solutioning worlds:

Imagine fantastic, near-realistic, and realistic worlds where all your problems are solved.


getting and gearing:

Notice when you’re “getting yourself” to do something versus it just happening. Notice when you’re “gearing yourself up” to do something versus just knowing you’re going to do it.


dwell in safety:

Find and dwell in safety, if only temporarily.


be insane:

Be insane; be crazy; be batshit insane.


be bad:

Be bad; be evil; be malevolent


be good:

Be gentle; be kind be; compassionate.


be out of control:

Find a way to be safe enough, and then be dangerously out of control


ask about goodness and badness:

Ask, “What’s good about that?” Ask, “What’s bad about that?”


be as human as you happen to be, right now:

Be human; be imperfect; be flawed. (You can/could truly aspire to true perfection, but allow yourself to be what you are right now, say, which is inclusive of that aspiration.)


counterexample:

Find counterexamples to thoughts, beliefs, assertions, written content, things that other people say…


perspective-taking:

Take person A’s perspective. Take person A’s perspective on person B’s perspective, and so on. Take person A’s perspective on your perspective. Take person A’s perspective on your perspective of person A’s perspective.


encourage it; egg it on:

Thus.


leave your comfort zone or explore leaving your comfort zone:

Thus.


explore doing what feels wrong to do:

Thus.


try temporarily letting go of your sacred objects, your sacred touchstones:

Thus.


temporarily and briefly block resist refuse some impulse/urge/inclination/reflex/action/doing:

Thus.


study your sensations as such for the purpose of understanding:

Thus.


be liminally verbal; on the edge of almost not quite words/language:

Thus.


identity:

Ask yourself, “Who you are being right now?” Ask yourself, “Which one are you right now?”


noninterference:

Enter into something allowing it to be exactly as it is.


be a self-friend:

Would you treat a dear friend that way with respect to X? Treat yourself as you would a dear friend with respect to X.


take a long, slow, dreamy walk in a safe place:

Thus.


study:

Study particular sensations or knowing so as to figure them out.


seeping into; keeping company:

Seep into yourself or into some sensations or keep some knowing company. Don’t try to change any of it.


describe:

describe what’s happening, describe what seems to be the case, describe what’s salient, describe what’s relevant


explicate/articulate:

Put knowing into words; what is relevantly coming up that you know right now, that you might not have known that you know?


bare sensations as such:

regard/construe all real time experience as bare sensations as such


mind-only:

explore how everything (or not) is just an expression of your mind (or not)


acquiesce:

Give X exactly what it wants:


become:

(Temporarily or not) become X.


relevance:

List what’s relevant and maybe try to determine why those things are relevant.


state awareness:

Decide in what ways you’re in a temporary state right now.


safe fear:

Make it safe to feel fear and to know what you’re afraid of.


explore intuition:

Explore taking intuitions seriously, including those for which you don’t have any obvious rational evidence (or whatever). Be psychic. Be clairvoyant. You can hold intuitions provisionally while you explore them.


question inner things:

Ask questions of distinct things in/of you: What are you? Who are you? Where did you come from? How did you come to be? How did you get here? What do you want? What would be good for you?


minimality:

Back off, utter lightweight-ness: do the lightest most minimal possible version of whatever you’re doing or want to do or want to try.


have fun:

Thus.


be openminded:

Be radically open to what might be true. Be unfiltered in your consideration of what might be true.

ok to hate:

Hate until/if you don’t.


shackles:

Ask, is X “shackles on” or “shackles off? [via Martha Beck’s Finding Your Own North Star and Steering by Starlight]


feel all towardsness:

Feel or allow yourself to feel your desire, wanting, longing, preferring, taste, hoping, wishing, needing, craving, thirsting, hungering, lusting…


your heart sing:

Remember/imagine (concretely) something that did/does/would make your heart sing (at least the first time or every time).


exhaustivity/comprehensiveness/systematicity:

Ask, is that it? Is there more? Anything else? What is the next thing? And the next? How do I know that I’m done? How will I know I’m done? How do I know there’s more?


go down a prefab list:

Run through all these practices to find ones that feel/seem good, currently. Run through all main practices to find ones that feel/seem good, currently. Try the meta protocol if you haven’t for a while. Try other collections besides ones in this document.



locate a deep felt sense: (h)

How do you _really_ feel right now? What deeper feelings are beginning to surface? What nebulous thing is going on at the edges of your awareness? The vaguer the better. Try to put it into words, or not.


compare/align sensory streams: (h)

Hold two or more different sensory streams in awareness at the same time, notice how they complement/corroborate/contradict each other. For example, while walking, pay close attention to what you see alongside sensations coming from the feet. Or while tapping a tabletop, pay attention to what you hear alongside sensations in the hands.


iteratively examine motivation: (h)

To what end am I doing what I am currently doing? And why that? And why that? &c. Can be meta-applied as well: in the course of inquiring what one is doing & why, one may inquire as to what one is doing in inquiring as such, and why.


refactor agency: (h)

À la V. Rao (https://www.ribbonfarm.com/2012/11/27/patterns-of-refactored-agency/). Notice a thought or framing of some occurrence, and split/clump/invert/rotate/refactor the agency/will of whatever is involved. Some examples: “Those flowers are alluring” → “Those flowers want to be admired”; “I want to eat the doritos” → “The doritos want to feed me”; “I hate this traffic” → “This traffic jam is angry with itself”; etc.


invent a concept: (h)

Name the heretofore unnamed. Slice reality along a new axis.


mindful hygiene: (h)

Practice hygiene slowly, attentively. Brush your teeth; floss; brush your hair; shave; wash your hands/face; bathe; trim nails; apply ointments/lotions.


mindful eating: (h)

Eat slowly, attentively. Do you want another bite? Which bite do you want? How does it feel when you put it in your mouth, as you chew? Temperature, texture, flavor? What happens when you swallow? Can you feel your stomach receiving the food?


examine time: (h)

Examine the passage of time (perhaps while attending to a particular sensation, such as an ongoing noise, or perhaps not).


do it more slowly: (h)

If it’s okay to do so, slow down in whatever you’re doing. Slow down more. And more. And juuuust a bit more.


hug yourself: (h)

Hug yourself. Touch yourself lovingly. Caress, rub, massage, hold. Which parts want attention? Let your body be an instrument of care for itself.


want everything: (h)

To whatever degree(s) it’s good & safe to do so, allow yourself to fully and totally desire everything desirable, large & small, good & bad, immediate & far-reaching. Want it all.


want nothing: (h)

To whatever degree(s) it’s good & safe to do so, allow yourself to fully and totally release/forgo any and all desires. Accept this & now as sufficient and complete.


disclaim (and reclaim) volitionality:

Interact with yourself, or parts of yourself, or what’s in you, only through a respectful interface; disclaim volitionality for what’s behind the interface. Drain your will from it. Temporarily treat it as not you. How can you affect it, now? What’s the right way to interact with it under these conditions?

Also: Do the opposite. Reclaim as makes sense, which might be an equal amount.


take a break:

Take a break from everything. Take a complete break. Totally rest, temporarily.


listen:

Listen for something faint and distant.


imagine/hallucinate:

Try to hallucinate life-sized, three-dimensional people, appearing/existing around you in your present physical space, as a problem-solving tool, a general exploratory tool, for fun, for sexual fantasy.


desire factoring:

Imaginatively remove (and maybe put back) things from something you desire until you figure out the essence of what you desire in the thing.


explore dimensions of phenomenology:

In what you’re experiencing right now, explore meaning-laden, phenomenology; explore meaningful phenomenology; explore valenced/unvalenced  phenomenology (pleasant/unpleasant); explore the absolute, mediate, and immediate causes and conditions of phenomenology, explore the and immediate and mediate effects of phenomenology.


pain of lack:

Feel the pain of lacking, the pain of not having.


wanting versus liking:

Explore the relationship between what you want (to do/have/experience) and what you, at least historically, *know* you *like* to experience. Explore the relationship between what you want to avoid and what you know you don’t like to experience.


resource testing:

Imagine yourself with various extra resources, only one or two at a time (money, very nice clothing, healthy solid relationship)—what changes? How would things be different?


only this moment:

Temporarily pretend only this moment exists.


exactly what it needs:

Imaginatively/bodily/experientially give something exactly what it needs, exactly the relationship it needs, with the person/entity it needs (friend, parent), in the language and concepts it needs, with the emotions it needs, that that something can feel, experience, and understand.


as a friend:

Ask, what advice would you give a friend about this?


querying ability:

Ask, could you do that? How would you do that? How would you solve that?


its job, it’s goal:

Ask something in you, that might not be you, what its job is, its goal, its purpose. Ask what it needs. Ask what’s good about it being there? Explore its felt goodness and badness.


bad counterfactual actuality:

Ask, would it be bad if this/that/X weren’t true? Ask, would it be bad if this/that/X were true?


state/find the X:

State the inner conflict, state the contradiction, state the physical impossibility (such as “those two things can’t coexist in the same space or be done with these resources or go faster than the speed of light or teleport). Or just find it; you don’t have to state it.


seek implicit understanding:

Thus.


seek explicit understanding:

Thus.


find the sparkle:

Find the childhood and/or teenage parts of you that sparkle with wonder and joy and appreciate and enjoy them and embody them 


intention:

What are you intending, planning, willing, right now? What is your intention [with respect to X]?


counterfactual closure:

Ask, what you could have done differently, along with some minimal other changes to a situation, so that X bad thing wouldn’t have happened? Or that would have made the bad thing ok?


stretch: (h)

Like a cat that just woke up from a long nap. Try while standing, lying down, or in some other position. Shoulders back, chest out, get on your tippy-toes & arch that spine, yawn, vocalize, release!


connect deeply with purpose/value/meaning/goodness: (h)

Notice your current situation/trajectory, and connect as deeply as you can with how this situation/trajectory is (now & ongoingly) meaningful & valuable, what purpose it serves, what broader good(ness) it relates to, etc. In what ways is today good/meaningful/valuable? How does the goodness/meaningfulness/value of today connect to the goodness/meaningfulness/value of your entire life?


notice the past: (h)

Notice momentary or ongoing conceptions of the past.


notice the future: (h)

Notice momentary or ongoing conceptions of the future.


notice discomfort: (h)

Are you (greatly or subtly) uncomfortable right now? Which sensations tell you that you are uncomfortable? Why doesn’t everything about right now feel great/fine/perfect?


attention pulled:

Let your attention be drawn places and maybe actively stay there for a bit once you get there.


volitional attention:

Attend somewhere two-dimensional or three-dimension or n-dimensional or non-dimensional, specifically, for at least a brief time.


liminal/nonverbal: (inspired by h)

Do what you’re already doing but deliberately move towards going it liminally verbally or nonverbally.


curiosity for disagreement:

Have respectful curiosity and inquisitiveness for what happens to be in you or is a part of you, that you disagree with.


resist attentional capture (1):

Some of the time, temporarily, concentrate (on something). Facilitate attentional capture.


resist attention capture (2):

Some of the time, temporarily, have a wide, open, fuzzy focus. Concentrate on everything or no-thing. Relax, do this minimally, minimally reactively, as minimally involved as you can.


balance foreground and background: (cf Lippmann and Culadasa)

Become aware of everything you can become aware of, in the “background,” while also attending to a “foreground” object. The background is in your peripheral awareness (cf. peripheral vision). Look both at and “through” the foreground object. Balance the salience of foreground and background so that they are potentially seamless in brief moments or stably.


look past (interpretive) overlays:

Look at something; look past that at “what’s really going on.”


the really truly possibly really good in the bad:

With the expectation that there’s something good and important, there, a wisdom of some kind: Ask would it be good to keep doing this bad thing? How would it be good to keep doing this good thing? Would it be bad to stop doing this bad thing? How/why would it be bad to stop doing this (at least partially) bad thing?


the chakras:

Attend for some time to each chakra, bottom to top, including genitals. Hara. Hands. Feet.


microcosmic orbit:

Move attention slowly through microcosmic orbit (loop around front and back of body from crown of head to perineum and back) in the direction [down the front, up the back; up the front, down the back] that feels most smooth.


bad to know/understand/see/be-able-to-tell:

Ask, is it bad to know [about] X, bad to understand [something about] X, bad to be able to see [something about X], bad to be able to tell something about X? If so, how did that come to be? Why? How do you know? How did you come to know?


homomorphic ostension or reference:

Come up with a metaphor, simile, allusion, allegory, analogy, or story for a relevant thing that might be otherwise hard to put into words. In that, what’s the problem, in that language/structure/ontology? What could be added inside that language/structure/ontology/logic? What’s obviously missing when seen from inside that?  How would manipulate that to solve the thing, strictly inside or that language/structure/ontology?


being/from:

Ask, is this from me? Is this from you? Is this me? Is this you? Is this him/her/per/them?


somatic refactoring:

Feel and relax your way into beneficial “somatic refactoring.” Let the body naturally and intricately change.


explore the body:

Exhaustively, but loosely, sensitively, being willing to back off or let go, explore the entire value of the body  with your attention, little by little. If you can’t attend somewhere, don’t force attention into the area. Explore what feels good and bad about this and what seems good and bad about doing it in different places and a different times.


fix/solve/solve:

Ask, can you do X/that? Can you fix X/that? Can you solve X/that? Can you handle X/that?


provenance and historical explanation:

Ask, how did that/X come to be?


looking/checking with what you already have:

Ask can you look to see whether that’s true or not? Can you find that out with what you already have? (If not, can you get more information if you need it? How? Can you do that? Will you do that?)


personal evaluative comparison:

Ask, for me, why do I want/choose/like/desire/pick/etc this/X versus that/Y. Which is better or worse? More good or less good versus each or the other?


meaning: 

Ask what does it/X/that mean?


ghost/energy hands:

Touch your body or feel into your body with ghost/energy hands.


fractured reality:

Feel the fractures of reality. Feel how reality is broken.


look down through the body:

Look down through your neck into your body from the inside


look at the back of you head: (after Headless Way?)

Look at the back of your head from the outside without the aid of a mirror, phone, anything.


be (pop?) zen:

No goal, nowhere to go, nothing to do, no escape, start or where you are, gateless gate, stateless state.


stop trying to escape the now:

Temporarily stop trying to escape from exactly what’s happening, exactly how it’s happening, and exactly what it is that’s happening.


take a break:

Thus.


collect simultaneous attentional objects:

“Collect” things in your awareness to pay attention to, and attend them sequentially or simultaneously.


ghost/energy body:

Be physically relatively still, but walk and move with your “ghost” body or “energy body.”


acceptance:

Accept that this is your life now or in fact always was.


instantaneous immortality:

Noticed that in this moment you literally cannot just directly and successfully choose to die.


expand:

Expand into the available space, “outer” or “inner.” Accept/become the available space, “outer” or “inner.”


broken phenomenology:

Feel your “‘broken’ phenomenology”; rest in it, all of yourself with it, as it is.


inability/can’t/ability/can:

If you find you can’t do something, explore how to phrase it conditionally:

(You might ask, why can’t I do this? How can I come to be able to do this? How did I come to not be able to do this? How do I know I can’t do this?)

can’t X while Y
can’t X when Y
can’t X until Y
can’t X since Y
can’t X where Y
can’t X because Y
can’t X without Y
etc.

Then, if it might be good to able to do X even while the conditions obtains, you might ask something like:

How might I be able to do X even while Y? What are some worlds where I might be able to do X even while Y?  even when Y? even if it’s not Y yet? even if Y has since obtained? even if Y holds? even if Y? even without Y?

Or, if it might be good to not have the condition obtain so you can do X, you might ask something like:

If Y prevents: How might I not have Y obtain? Are there good worlds where Y doesn’t obtain? What might such a world look like? How might I know I were in such a world? Might I be in such a world already or how might I arrive in such a world?

If Y enables: How might I have Y obtain? Are there good worlds where Y does obtain? What might such a world look like? How might I know I were in such a world? Might I be in such a world already or how might I arrive in such a world?


stimulate all your senses: (a)

Thus.

minimize sensory input: (a)

Thus.


shackles:

Ask, is X “shackles on” or “shackles off? [via Martha Beck's Finding Your Own North Star and Steering by Starlight]


exertion: (ae)

Exert yourself past a few layers of muscular and cardiovascular exhaustion, but not so many that you have to stop, to achieve a difficult goal.

comment:

This one needs refinement of scope and clarity, and also careful consideration of safety in the most literal ways. For me comes from climbing, hiking, alpinism: "Exert yourself past a few layers of muscular and cardiovascular exhaustion, but not so many that you have to stop, to achieve a difficult goal." I'm pointing at something that feels qualitatively different to me than HIIT-type pushing to failure. It seems important that there is a summit or whatever to get to (and come back from!) and what you are doing is ultimately unsustainable but will last you just the next hour/day/relevant medium term, and somehow you are doing a bunch of inference to figure out just how hard that means pushing yourself right now.


don’t despair: (j)

Thus.


dwell in unknowing/uncertainty/confusion: (j)

(Allow/let yourself to) dwell in unknowing/uncertainty/confusion:

comment:

cf Keats’ idea of negative capability (edited) 


play a character: (h)

Thus:

comment:

a character whose traits are very different from the ones you typically embody; can happen either in private or in public; can be an existing character (e.g. gandalf) or an archetype (e.g. motherly woman) or something else entirely; how does your character move, think, speak, carry him-/her-/itself? what is different, when you’re this character, than when you’re not this character?


stream-of-consciousness writing: (h*)

Allow yourself to transcribe your stream-of-consciousness as best you can.

comment:

can be centered on a topic/feeling/thought/idea, or unconstrained; find a pace that works & capture on paper as much as you can that enters your awareness — don’t worry about structure or coherency; then reflect on what you wrote, or not.


explore gratitude: (h*)

Ask, what are you grateful for, right now? How do you know you’re grateful? What does it feel like? What don’t you feel grateful for? What is it like not to feel grateful? What causes gratitude or non-gratitude? What is different about your relationship with [thing you’re grateful for] compared to your relationship with [thing you’re not grateful for]?


explore courage: (h*)

Ask, what would the courageous thing to do be, with respect to X? How does it feel to [imagine] carry[ing] out courageous action? How does courage relate to fear? Without forming intentions to actually execute them, explore scenarios of enacting courage.


mindful pooping: (h*)

Poop mindfully.


do something uncomfortable or difficult: (h)

Non-coercively do something you find uncomfortable or difficult (but which you will retrospectively endorse). E.g. take a cold shower; chat up a stranger; fast for a day; etc.


notice your voice: (h)

Carefully listen to & feel your own voice as you speak in daily life.


consider death: (h)

Consider [the idea of] death, as much as it is safe & good to do so. For instance, what is death? What memories, concepts, thoughts, and feelings arise in connection with the idea of death? Are you afraid of death? What would it mean not to be afraid of death? Can you imagine facing death right now? What specifically would be bad about dying right now? What about the deaths of others? Do non-living things die?


be broken: (h)

Be broken, crushed, shattered, utterly defeated, crippled, collapsed, damaged, riven.


affirm everything: (h)

To anything expressed by yourself or another, respond: “totally.“/”definitely.“/”100%.“/”right on.“/”yeah!”


catch flinching: (h)

Notice when you flinch, turn away, shut down, distract yourself, change the subject, compulsively open reddit in a new tab, etc. Don’t try to do anything about the flinching, yet. 

comment: (a*)

See also: affirm nothing, flinch volitionally, explore cowardliness ...Do you really want these things? Or are you in fact too afraid to be a coward, now?


maybe: (j)

Thus.


temporarily stop planning:

Temporarily stop planning and just see what happens next, see what you do next, as much as that feels safe.


talk to yourself as if: (j)

Talk to yourself as if you were an elder or older, wiser version of yourself  (edited) 


reinterpret: (h)

Search for new interpretations of X. X can be an interaction, an event, an image, a place, a concept, a memory, an intention, a feeling, etc etc. Can also be done by taking new assumptions along with X. For example, “how can i reinterpret that argument i got into, if i take the new assumption that the other person wasn’t trying to hurt me?” (edited) 


notice what, notice how: (h)

1. For whatever you’re doing/saying, notice what exactly you’re doing/saying. [the ends/purpose/goal/intent/function]
2. For whatever you’re doing/saying, notice how exactly you’re doing/saying it. [the means/style/method/manner/form] (edited) 


back to the drawing board: (h)

Go back to the drawing board, regarding X.


do something symbolically meaningful: (h)

Thus.


devise new/better/relevant auxiliary practices: (h ht j)

Thus.


explore/refactor the concept of meditation itself: (h)

 What does it mean to meditate? What does it mean to meditate well/correctly or poorly/incorrectly? What activities/states/situations are incompatible with meditation? In what ways is your method of meditating self-defeating? What would improve the experience of meditating by 5%? by 500%? Would it be ok to never meditate again? why or why not? etc etc

comment:

[similar to meta-protocol]
[similar to doing p1 with the concept “meditation”]


forgive: (h)

Forgive that which it’s good to forgive. Forgive others; forgive yourself.


repent: (h)

Thus.


pray: (j)

Thus.


fart around: (j)

Thus.


tingles and non-tingles:

Gently and softly and dreamily track down tingles and non-tingles. (edited) 


hold contradictions: (h)

Hold/be/embody both/all aspects of seeming contradictions within yourself. Dwell in contradiction/paradox.


check out:

Completely check out. Play. Total nonvigilance, total vacation, deep-dive into hobbies, interests for minutes, hours or days. Notice if you can’t.


get absorbed in something:

Get lost in something. Lose yourself in something. Become absorbed in something. Forget about the world. Notice if you can’t.


constrain yourself: (j)

Arbitrarily (or not) make decisions, add constraints, give yourself less degrees of freedom, give yourself less breathing room, put stakes in the ground.


sleep on it: (j)

Thus.


surround yourself with beauty/goodness: (h)

Thus. 


pray to be and/or have and/or have happen:

Thus.


embrace the [almost completely intolerable] “cringy inner chaotic hellscape”:

Thus.


“enjoy” the [normal] almost perfectly intolerable infinite[ly and critically] bad electrically agonizing awful cringe:

Thus.


try enjoying it: (h)

Thus.

comment:

a sort of in-joke. whenever someone’s having a bad time, [...] asks “have you tried enjoying it?”


just [actively] sit, bravely and skillfully:

Thus.


let whatever happens happen:

Thus.


let you attention dance:

Thus.


be shameless:(h)

Thus.


time off: (j*)

Give yourself the day off.
Give yourself the day/night/hour/unit-of-time off.


respond with “maybe”: (j*)

Respond to your questions, certainties, concerns, etc, with “maybe”
“Oh my god I can’t believe X is happening. This will be terrible.” “Maybe”
“Will it be good if I Y?” “Maybe”

comment:

Inspired by the Taoist farmer story 


notice the ways in which you are safe:

Thus.


allow yourself to be doubtful:

Thus. 


endure:

Simply endure, allowing awareness and feeling as best you can, as best you can without shutting down, white-knuckling, teeth-gritting, but only if that’s safe. 


recurring dreams:

Notice your recurring dreams.


permission:

List who or what you currently need permission from, even if you disendorse needing it.


not allowed:

List what you’re not allowed to do, even if you disendorse even the entire frame of “not being allowed.”


posture continuum:

Pretend posture lies on a continuum from (A) comfortable fetal position to (B) standing tall and loose (or even walking slowly or ad hoc tai chi or qigong). See if it might be currently good to move more towards (A) or more towards (B), and do so if so.


physically exhaust yourself: (h)

Thus.


examine a flower or a leaf or a stone: (h)

Thus.


chat with/talk to your X-year-old self: (h)

Thus.


be someone else: (h)

Thus.


locate the tragedy/mystery/joy/etc in X: (h)

Thus.


notice what’s forbidden: (h)

Thus.


trace the origin of X [in oneself]: (h)

Thus.


make a list of everything: (h)

Thus.


list possibilities: (h)

Thus.


do whatever is necessary to X: (h)

Thus.


locate the sacredness of X: (h)

Thus.


notice feeling connected to or disconnected from others & self & nature/world/environment: (h)

Thus.


adopt a rigid moral code: (h)

Thus.


dissect language: (h)

Thus.


pay attention to the X content of communication: (h)

Pay attention to the emotional/intention/timing/sensitivity/feeling content of communication.


pay attention to the Y content of communication: (h)

Pay attention to the words/phrasing/conceptual/structural/thought content of communication.


play with “X happened to me” vs. “I chose X”: (h)

Thus.


what pattern is X part of?: (h)

Thus.


notice that you’re already enlightened/perfect/fine/good/good enough: (h)

Thus.


write a song/poem/rock opera: (h)

Thus.


study the cringe as if you were a scientist: (h)

Thus.


notice what happens when you notice: (h)

Thus.

Commentary:

For me & probably others, there is residue from the way I was taught to meditate, namely from instructions like “if you notice you’re thinking, return to the breath” or similar. There are some very tight hooks in my mind such that when I notice certain things, I immediately have some internal reaction. There are lots of them, but one which is probably pretty common for people who’ve tried pop meditation is: notice thought -> interrupt it & pay attention to something else.


cultivate/dwell in solitude: (h)

Thus.


take solace in the journey: (j*)

Taking solace in the exhaustiveness of the journey. Or, like, in non bypassing ways the thing you’re working towards is such a big exhaustive total something thing that a lot of things that stress you out currently are rounding errors ultimately or something or ok or something.


connect with proximal ideal future concretes: (aj*)

Connect with the concrete details + felt sense of your ideal experience 3 years from now.


improvise, or see/frame your life as improv: (j)

Thus.


ask for what you want/need: (j)

Thus.

Commentary:

Or ask yourself, ‘can you ask for the thing you want/need?’ are you safe and/or able to do so?

make small, little bets: (j)

Thus.


shake, shiver, quake: (aj*)

If shakes come, let them.


release all technique:

Thus.


release all conceptions about how the mind works or should work:

Thus.


mind doing and state release:

Experiment with avoiding “doing things with your mind” and avoiding “trying to have your mind be a particular way”


no mind:

Provisionally try on the idea that there is no such thing as minds and you don’t have one, but everything else is the same. What now?


no self:

Provisionally try on the idea that there is no such thing as selves and you don’t have a self and aren’t a self, but everything else is otherwise exactly same as it is right now. what now?


flat mind: (j*)

Provisionally try on the idea that the mind is “flat” or “just-in-time” or that the contents of awareness in some sense don’t exist until they’re constructed for that moment (making no metaphysical commitments about anything else).


no containment:

Provisionally try on the idea that there is no such as inside and outside nor things inside other things, nor anything inside or outside anything else, but everything else is the same. What now?


no boundaries:

Provisionally try on the idea that there is no such as boundary or separation, but everything else is the same. What now?


no thought:

Provisionally try on the idea that you never ever have to think another thought, but everything else is the same. What now?


no people:

Gently, gently, temporarily, provisionally try on the idea that there are no people and there never was a person, but everything else is the same. What now?


no things:

Provisionally try on the the idea that there are no things, no objects, not even any stuff :scream: , but everything else is exactly the same. What now?


no time:

Provisionally try on the idea that there is no time, that it doesn’t pass, that it doesn’t exist, that it never did. but, everything else is exactly the same. What now?


no space:

Provisionally try on the idea that there is no space, no spatial relations, no adjacency, no empty space, no things occupying space, no delimited volume, that these don’t exist and that they never did. but, everything else is exactly the same. What now?


embrace identity:

Explore if/that/whether you are one, in particular that you are this one. and not that one or any of these or those other ones.


already dead:

Consider the idea that you’re already dead but everything else is exactly the same. What now?


right before you start:

Notice what happens or what you do in the split seconds before you “start meditating.”


forget how to think:

Pretend you’ve forgotten how to think. What now?


psychic how to think:

Pretend someone doesn’t know how to think and you can show them how to think psychically, mind-to-mind--they can watch your mind do things, directly. what do you do with your mind to demonstrate thinking to them?


psychic how to meditate:

Pretend someone doesn’t know how to meditate and you can show them how to meditate psychically, mind-to-mind--they can watch your mind do things, directly. what do you do with your mind to demonstrate meditating to them?


simultaneity:

Have two or more things happen in your mind simultaneously. also for gross motor movement.
sequentiality: have two or more things happen in your mind sequentially. also for gross motor movement.


play with vibe:

Try on different vibes, different global (outward-experienciable) feels.


inner safety:

Pretend other people can’t infer your inner state or know it in any way. Explore if you have any new or different affordances or insights while pretending this.


no nos:

Pretend no/not/negation (even nothingness) don’t exist. what now? [seriously] (edited) 


trust your perceptions:

Trust what you observe, plain as day. Rest in what is obvious and veridical to you right now.


honor mediate wrongness:

If something feels wrong, even if you can’t put your finger on it or you can’t speak it, know that something must be wrong, somewhere.


call bullshit:

Thus.


remember relevant assertions:

Remember all the ways people/books/websites/etc have asserted or implied what people are, what minds are, how minds should be used, what’s good and what’s bad, what’s true and what’s false, how truth works and how it must be found, how minds work and how thinking works, how thinking should be done, what’s good to do, what’s bad to do. Do you agree, disagree, or are you uncertain? What must you believe or disbelieve? What do you endorse or disendorse about this?

commentary:

This stuff gets in, it gets reified, some portion of it’s good, some portion of it makes us rigid, blocks our truth-seeking, our creativity, our joy, our seeking. (edited) 


notice judging/blaming: (h)

Thus, and develop a method to inquire/analyze/understand/orient around it (or not).


notice pressure: (h)

Notice the ways that everyone is subtly or overtly pressuring each other all the time.


notice support: (h)

Notice the ways that everyone is subtly or overtly supporting/encouraging/loving each other all the time.


have patience:

Have perfect, sensitive, intricate, painstaking, long-game patience. Pocketwatch watch-building and watch-repairing, where the gears are normal tiny size but the watch is as big as a moon, and different tiny parts on different sides of the moon might need to precisely co-vary, so you might need to go back and forth between them. Sprinkling colored sand, not geoengineering or even shoveling dirt. 


not too much/too large:

Remember the mind is big but you can practically get through it “all,” in a first pass, in a fraction of a lifetime.


immaculate provenance:

Provisionally assume X isn’t your fault even if it is now your responsibility


total responsibility:

Provisionally assume you will have to solve X completely deeply and fully.


strategic deferral:

if you can unforcily and endorsedly put something off until later do so.


don’t overthink things: (j)

Thus. 


unsurprising-surprising dissolve:

Explore that so many things you might never ever have to solve because they’ll truly turn out to either not be a problem or that they never were actually a problem.


comfort yourself: (h*)

Thus, or: offer compassion to yourself] thus, as genuinely as you can [but no more genuinely than that]

commentary:

i have gotten a lot of mileage out of saying “it’s okay [...], you’re doing a great job” to myself, either spoken or written. but it seems to be important to actually express it in one way or another; i.e. simply thinking the thought doesn’t do nearly as much as writing or speaking to self does.


separate (don’t) want/might (to) be true: (h)

Separate things that you really really do/don’t want to be true from what is/might actually be true.

commentary:

might be a cleaner way to say this. like “earnestly, fearlessly sensemake”.


sort out good & bad: (h)

Make a list of all the things that are good, and all the things that are bad. Be as nuanced or not as you like. Notice contradictions, omissions, & anything that doesn’t fit in either list.


get comfortable: (j)

Make yourself comfortable. Prioritize comfort. Take actions one after the other until you feel totally and utterly comfortable, even and perhaps especially if it "doesn't feel worth it". 


spotting: (aj*)

Pay attention to how your level of activation changes as you move your eyes to different positions in xyz space.

commentary:

Moving my eyes seems to cue different attention patterns to my body and near-body space.  Something like linear search across x then y, then z seems to zero in on activating coordinates well.  Fascinating. [See maybe: Kenny Dennis; Brainspotting]] 


basis:

Ask, what is the basis of this? What does this depend on?


privilege effortlessness, costlessness, and intuition:

Thus.


ask who/with/what/good/bad: (h)

Ask, “who or what is calling X bad[/good]?“, or “X is bad[/good] according to whom/what?”
Ask, “with what is X’s badness[/goodness] in contradiction with?”
Ask, “what if X were good[/bad]? what about X is good[/bad]?”
Ask, “is it possible to have/do/be X in a way that is good[/bad]?” (edited) 


no good, no bad: (h)

No good, no bad: provisionally assume that there is no such thing as good or bad.


embrace imperfection:

Thus.


embrace “analog”:

Embrace analog/aconceptual/preconceptual/transconceptual/nondigital experiencing. 


meditate poorly; meditate incorrectly:

Thus.


tinker:

Tinker, experiment, see what happens, iteratively.


feel broken:

Feel into experiential/phenomenological and visceral brokenness and uselessness. 


ask for whom:

Ask, for who(m) and why? Ask, along what dimensions and according to what schema?


forgive yourself: (j)

Thus.


trust: (j)

Trust that this experience/moment you’re currently having/experiencing is in some sense, the right one. That there isn’t something wrong (in some sense) with the experience. Trust it’s rightness. Cf: relax, ease, acceptance, non-resistance,


let yourself be supported: (j)

Feel the ground underneath you. Notice how little you have to do to be held, and how much support the earth can provide. Relax/ease into this support.


abandon reason: (j)

Act/say/do/want/request/believe/assert/head-in-the-direction-of... just because you feel like it, even if you don’t have reasons, even if it doesn’t make sense, even if you don’t understand.
Don’t feel a need to justify or provide reason (to yourself or others). That which doesn’t make sense. That which you don’t understand.


walk it off: (j)

Thus.


experience the elements: (j)

Purify yourself in water. Cleanse yourself in the wind. Feel the grounding of the earth. Warm yourself by/in the fire.


follow the signs: (j)

Thus.


breadth-first: (h)

Do/go/explore/play/incline/work breadth-first, broad and shallow.


depth-first: (h)

Do/go/explore/play/incline/work depth-first, narrow and deep.


think nonverbally: (h)

Incline toward thinking nonverbally — spatially, visually, conceptually, tactilely, kinesthetically, mathematically, musically, etc.


notice unconscious patterns: (h)

Notice unconscious habits, body language, attitudes, thought patterns, behavioral patterns, vocal tone, speech style, posture, positioning, mood shifts, inclinations, desires, etc. Don't do anything about them, yet.


play: (h)

In whatever domain you happen to be in, see if you can play. Notice if you can’t.

comment:

“Explore childlike playfulness” already exists in the prot. The two feel different to me.


keep going: (j)

So, you just discovered/encountered/realized the truest truth [sic], or the most perfect plan? Before you rush off and buy those plane tickets, consider holding your discovery lightly, and keep going, keep turning the (relevant) crank(s).
cf error checking, letting it flow/shift/change


where and when:

Realize that you are here, now, not there, then.


concreteness/abstractness:

Realize it’s concretely this, not abstractly that.


be impulsive: (j)

Thus.


from fear or love: (j*)

Consider whether you are acting/deciding/doing/etc out of fear or love


ignoring and listening:

Explore how and when to safely and temporarily ignore; Explore how and when to safely and temporarily listen, with part or every fiber of your being, or not.


how do you know:

Tired, sad, hungry, anxious, etc. – – ask how do you know [you are] (that) [right now]? How do you know, of things like that, what you are right now?


commit (for the purpose of potentially dissolving):

Really commit to the taboo, illegal, immoral, frivolous, dangerous thing you want to do, to do/be/have/get/experience the thing. Start to plan, start to pre-enjoy. Start to figure out how to make it happen.


love, compassion, sympathetic joy:

Reach for your felt experience of these, with or without object.


error perspective:

Remember, it’s ok to find that you’ve “been doing it wrong.” That means it’s working. That means you’ve been doing it right. And you are doing it right. Perhaps feel into this.


find your can’ts:

Find your “can’t beliefs”: can’t do X, can’t learn Y, could never Z, could never in a million years do Q… These can be both “inability beliefs,” where you straightforwardly can’t do the thing (or so you belief, or right now but maybe not later) or “won’t beliefs,” like, you could but you won’t because of something else--too risky, too emotionally intense, too emotionally risky, etc. For all of this, it can get more subtle--can’t do X with my mind, can’t learn to program, can’t learn to factor these numbers. So, things from your past, too, say, maybe early in school or before school. It can all the way to “deep sensory processing” type things--“my mind won’t/can’t do that” or “no minds can do that.”


deathbed:

Imagine good, bad, best-case, worst-case deathbed scenarios. What’s happening, who’s there, how do you feel about it?


other people:

Explore the ways, whats, whens in which it does and doesn’t matter what other people think of you.


revisit things of the past: (h)

When the time is right, revisit memory-laden objects, songs, movies, photographs, places, etc 


picture your child, having your childhood: (aj)

Call to mind your child (or future child, or friend’s child) having the exact same childhood you did.  Every sorrow and hope.  Fly on the wall for every challenge small and large.


assume you have no idea what "play" is: (aj)

What changes?  What would you do to figure it out from scratch?


safe to look:

Ask, for a there a way to come for it to be safe to look?


better than this:

Ask, is there a way to come to something more good/better/nourishing/correct/I/me/myself than this?


more or less real:

Ask, is this more real or less real?


younger or older:

Ask, is this younger or older?


good/bad forwards/backwards:

Ask, is this good-forwards, good-backwards, bad-forwards, bad-backwards?


really real:

Explore whether there’s something that seems more real, more causally upstream, more important than physical reality.


let itself:

Let it do/undo itself. Help it do/undo itself.


models: (h)

What are your implicit and explicit world/self models? How are or aren’t they serving you?


deeper:

Ask, is there something deeper?


underneath:

Ask, is there something more underneath?


unknown unintended consequences of omission and commission: (m)

Consider the unintended consequences of the things you do and don't do. Consider how you don't know what almost any of them are..


safe anger:

Explore how to make it safe to feel (extreme, white hot, perseverative, repetitive) anger, rage, hate/hatred, outrage, disgust, fury (fear, envy, jealousy, horror) at specific/particular/concrete people in general or for specific/particular/concrete behaviors/actions/inactions/commissions/omissions, for seconds, minutes, hours, days, weeks. Deem them as horrible and bad as they are, to you or in the absolute. Explore how to make it safe to not suppress this, to not talk yourself out of this, to not try to (prematurely or otherwise) forgive them, to not try to (prematurely or otherwise) understand them or walk in their shoes so as to humanize, empathize, etc. (You can surely do all those things, but also explore the former things, too.

commentary:

People do things completely outside our expectations, sometimes outside our expectations of anyone, anywhere doing such a thing or being such a way. A natural response is potentially the emotions above. They might be more extreme or last longer and more repetatively than you thought possible or good. But allowing those emotions, when there’s enough wisdom/slack/space in the system, when it’s safe to allow those emotions, facilitates processing, model building, wisdom. On the other side of those emotions is wisdom--sometimes it’s forgiveness, sometimes it’s forbearance, sometimes it’s surgical competence, sometimes it’s love, and many other things. Can’t predict the specific shape of wisdom (I think; though it can be healthy/smart/good to try). (edited) 


stay in (the) flow: (j)

Thus.


reactions:

Explore how to make it safe to be allowed to have your (patiently extended) reactions. [sic]


self-censoring:

Explore how to make it safe to not self-censor. Try not self-censoring (or as best you can).


feedback loops: (b)

Pause all your feedback loops.


plan evaluation: (j)

Consider: how do you know everything isn’t going exactly according to “plan”? How do you know anything truly has gone wrong or is bad? (edited) 


listening and ignoring:

(1) Try/explore broadband (fullband) listening/opening/entertaining, to the farthest reaches, at the finest grain (while still differentiating self and other). (2) Try/explore broadband facilitating/helping... (3) Try/explore broadband ignoring/keeping-out/relevancing/prioritizing/concluding, to the farthest reaches, at the finest grain.


no language: (h)

Temporarily provisionally assume/act as though language doesn't exist 


open mind:

Explore having an open mind about particular things that come up (beliefs, assertions, certainties…), as they come up,  one-by-one or otherwise: Might it actually be different than that? What might it be instead?


already-ness:

Turn towards what you are and have been already effortlessly ongoing-ly aware of. (edited) 


reaction owning and backlog:

Own your reactions, let yourself have your reactions to the degree it’s currently safe. If you have a backlog of reactions, let them start to come up, one by one, to the degree that it’s currently safe.


cry:

Thus/Let yourself cry.


experiential envelope:

Find and rest in the entirety of the “experiential envelope.”


ongoing teleportation/slide attempting:

Explore whether you’re ongoing-ly trying to, right here, right now, instantly, instantaneously do/have/be something, someone, somewhere else, to have self or world be different in this exact particular moment or the one immediately next, and next.


entirety of the thing:

Let yourself always already be the entirety of the “experiential envelope.”


infrequently attended:

Ask, where on or in your body or anywhere or anywhen have you not paid attention recently or since time long forgotten? Is there a way to safely, non-force-ily, safely incline there (or then)?


standing tall:

Stand tall and balanced. What feels weird in your body?


say a thing is something: (m)

Say a thing is something. Perceive that it is not.

comment:

"whatever you say a thing is, it is not." (—Korzybski)


body on mind:

Ask, what does your body think about what your mind is thinking?


according to whom:

See what you believe about something. Ask, according to who/whom?


lightly experimentally intensify:

Lightly experimentally intensify the (at least seemingly partially) bad thing e.g. sadness, muscle tension, etc.


something wildly different: 

Stop what you’re doing and do anything wildly different than what you we’re doing on one or as many dimensions as you can.


won’t:

Ask why you won’t do X? I won’t do this because...


overall:

Ask yourself, what is the overall thing you’re doing?


how:

Ask yourself, how are you doing what you’re doing?


pairwise cross-correlate long-range disparate body discomfort points:

Thus. 


completely check out; play:

Total non vigilance, total vacation, deep-dive into hobbies or interests for minutes, hours, or days. Notice if you can’t.


forget:

Get lost In something, forget about the world. Notice if you can’t. 


try on X:

Try X on and accept it as if it were you, were deeply a part of you temporarily. How would that be ok if that were actually the case, in the world where that was actually the case?


strange believing and seeming:

Explore how to have it be safe to believe the strangest truths--maybe they’re true or it’ll change to get more true over time, maybe the belief will be transient and something even better will come in time.. Explore how to have it be safe for the world to seem the strangest of ways, through-and-through. Maybe that seeming is correct or good, or it’ll sculpt to something better over time. Maybe it’ll be transient and something even better will come in time.


radical intuition:

Explore how to have it be safe to trust, to act on, or to merely openly entertain “radical intuition,” knowing without there being any seemingly reasonable or correct or even possible mechanism, basis in experience and/or method for a particular (or any) knowing, believing, seeming, expecting, acting, etc.


terrible truths:

Let yourself believe terrible truths or let yourself disbelieve terrible truths, in the service of reaching better, healthier, saner, more correct, more humane, more good truths. Believe, enter, embody, when safe, for the possibility of change and/or letting go.


seek beauty:

Thus


seek your aesthetic:

Thus


sensory landscape:

Ask, what do you want to see, hear, feel, touch, taste, smell, contemplate?


ability lack identification:

Ask, what ability or play or way of doing this, if I had it, would solve this?


ability building:

Ask, how might I do this or come to be able to do this? What would I do here that would make this and/or everything around it doable or easier?


appreciate X:

Thus. See the good in/of X.


enjoy X:

Thus.


directness:

Sometimes can be helpful (and sometimes counterproductive) to ask, is there are more direct or immediate thing? Why can't I just straightforwardly (do/be/have/go after) X, right now?


learn from your mistakes: (j)

Thus.


love:

Love. Or consider whether love, some form or type of love, or just love, is the answer to X.


current limitations:

embrace precisely current but not necessarily future limitations, inabilities


in-this-moment inabilities:

Enjoy your in-this-moment inabilties.


explore temporal continuity:

Explore perfect temporal continuity/continuousness/nonfragmentation/smoothness/non-gap-py-ness of attention


slow it way down:

Thus. 


do it without skips or jumps or gaps:

Thus. 


break it into syllables:

Break it into syllables. Say it syllable by syllable.


do subtle:

Do subtle, barely perceptible things with body or mind.


gravity, bone, and muscle:

Explore the relationship between gravity, bone, and muscle.


posture differential: (h)

Incline toward "perfect posture". Incline toward your body's natural posture. What changes?

commentary:

Not perfectly formulated, and for some reason I'm not totally thrilled with the concept behind this one. Maybe at least needs comment about how problems can be on either side — one's posture can be imperfect due to eg muscle tension; or one's idea of "perfect posture" can itself be imperfect.
Maybe I'm not thrilled because reifying the idea of "perfect posture" could be harmful


don’t overthink things: (jd)

Thus.


make your body available: (h)

to the degree(s) to which it’s good to do so & in the way(s) in which it’s good to do so, make your body available for feelings, felt senses, urges, impulses, instincts, reflexes, whims, ideas, postural changes, movements, shifts, twitches, shivers, spasms, pleasure, pain, (dis)comfort, expansions, contractions, forces, energy, vibrations, waves, etc to come through & manifest.


stop holding: (d)

Stop holding your current posture. Stop holding.


check in with yourself: (h)

Thus.


underthink: (d)

Thus.


think ahead: (d)

Blend all your actions into one continuous smooth motion.


don’t overthink things: (jd)

Thus.

surrender: (jd)

Thus.


allow: (jd)

Thus.

be patient: (jd)

Be/cultivate/surrender-to patient/patience.


commune with the plants: (jd)
Thus.


commune with nature: (jd)
Thus.


align yourself with the natural flow of nature / the natural world: (jd)
Thus.


love: (jd)
Thus.


enter your heart space: (jd)
Thus.


don't do: (d; “metaaux”)

For a practice "do x", don't do x.


do not: (d; “metaaux”)

For a practice "do x", do not-x


passively have happen; already the case: (d; “metaaux”)

For a practice "do x", have x happen to you, or have it so you become such that x without acting in order to do so.

For a practice "do x", imagine that x is already the case

comment:

I'm thinking things like "imagine a string attached to the top of your spine and hanging down from it" or "imagine your shoulders moving away from each other". I'm not sure off the top of my head how those AT directions are phrased, I'll have to look back on them


wait and see: (jd)

Thus.


slow down: (jd)

Thus.


listen to nature: (jd)

Thus.


meditate with crystals: (jd)

Thus.


prioritize being over doing: (jd)

Thus.


prioritize feeling over thinking: (jd)

Incline towards / prioritize feeling over thinking.


let things get messy: (jd)

Thus.


take the dive: (h)

Thus.


use your strength: (h)

Thus.

rest in restlessness: (h)

Thus.


get underneath the level of story: (jd)

Thus.

comment:

Story, narrative, etc. What’s underneath? What’s ‘deeper’? What’s below? 


notice directness or indirectness:

Explore whether you can just directly go after something and have it, do it, be it, or achieve it. Or, are you planning, learning, preparing, etc. If you are doing the latter, why not the former?

comment:

An alternative name/stance for this practice is, “notice complex versus simple.”


thing behind the thing or bask directly:

Ask not just what’s good about something, but also, what’s useful about it, compelling, attractive, persuasive, glorious, beautiful, perfect along some dimension, etc.

comment:

Compare with the practice of simply asking what’s good about something.


bask in the goodness of badness:

Bask in the felt e.g. compelling nature of some bad thing.

comment:

Compare with the practice of simply asking what’s good about something.


everything against everything:

Try checking each (and every) possible change [you make] against everything. check everything against everything. Or how does absolutely everything [that’s [in/of] you] incrementally feel about what you’re doing? down to smallest part/pixel/voxel/intention/stake/impulse/doing/will/whatever. Check in, touch base, with all of you.


total self-consensus:

try moving forward only when 100% of you is ok with the forward thing. if 100% of you is not ok then try a slightly or very different thing, which might be exploring the not ok-ness(es) or something else.


pattern attending:

explore attending to places in different repeating patterns, switching up the order in which you attend. cf microcosmic orbit, forward and backwards, as well as anything else.


total ordering:

Play with attending to “everything in order” and then repeating, so everything in order, over and over again, while playing with what “everything” (what’s the whole? what are the parts?) and “the order” should be.


top down unilateral vs top down listen vs bottom up:

Ask, in the next moment, should I unilaterally do something, should I listen to everything and then do something, or should I let everything move me?


collect past self-resolutions:

collect past resolutions, declarations, promises you made to yourself about behavior and the future


selectively embrace the dark side and feel/enjoy/appreciate its power:

Thus.


problem behind the problem:

Ask what’s the problem behind the problem? the need behind the need? 


let go and rest in self-earned self-trust:

Thus.


mechanism:

Ask, how does that work? What's going on, here? What's this?


voice:

Ask, what does it say? What is it saying? What would it say? (To whom, if anyone?) is there a one-sentence essence or distillation of that?


rub your face:

Rub your face in a way that feeels good until you get bored. (Maybe wash your hands first.)


verbally distill:

Write down distilled/concise/summarized insights as they come to you, as sketches, first drafts. On a new line write a new version, or an addition, or anything. And so on. Maybe keep them all in a single document.


imagine the worst:

Imagine the worst case, the worst outcome. Is it as bad as you thought?

Ask, what might someone be feeling in a case or situation like this? Might you be feeling that somewhere? Where? How?


explore an aftermath:

Ask, what would you do if x stopped, went away?


identify the/an ideal:

Explore for and imagine the lived ideal version of the wanted thing in a/its context.


causal chain:

Ask, what’s the causal chain that led up to this?


map or territory:

Ask, is that a property of the map or a property of the territory?


encodings:

Ask, are you encodings in words or memory or being or…?


look for how to non-manage:

Incline towards it being safe for it to take care of itself, no need for propping up.

Ask is there path where this doesn’t have to be propped up or managed, where anything in this space in some form can just take care of itself?


look for “if could only just X”:

Look for places where “if (could) only (just) X”.


jiggle: (h)

Jiggle jiggle.


thus: (b)

Thus. Thus.


have fun with the practice: (b)

Thus. 

play with the practice: (b)

Thus. 


mind, body, world: (h)

What's happening in your mind? What are you doing in your mind?
What's happening in your body? What are you doing in your body?
What's happening in the world? What are you doing in the world?

comment:

I noticed that this is sort of a way i slice things when i query what's happening


outside:

Explore how/whether/if you don’t know anything for sure outside this moment.


surety:

Explore how/whether/if you don’t know anything for sure about the future.


cradle:

Make a whole-bodymind “self-interpersonal trauma cradle” where things can arise for which you can comfort and protect yourself.


non-second-order believing and wanting:

Explore how to not try to make yourself belief things. Explore how to not try to make yourself want things. (Or not believe or not want)


wretchedness:

To the degree that it’s safe, let yourself be wretched.


late-stage freakout or triggering:

To the degree that it’s safe, have a late-stage freakout and even later ones. Sometimes the worst is saved for last, or second to last, or…

comment:

It doesn’t mean you haven’t made all that progress.


systematic suffering:

Intentionally suffer (gently) in various ways, dredge up suffering, (gently, aligned-ly, patiently) find, call up latent suffering, turn towards, catch, go into, facilitate suffering that is present or arises (non-physically, physically completely safely, with minimal drama and extraneous emotion).

comment:

One might add “inhabit,” or “dwell in,” but those seem to connote or imply or presuppose or “pre-conceive” (“too much”?) permanence.


notice grasping/accumulating versus suffering:

Thus.


suffering party:

Have a solo or small-group suffering party.


24-7 suffering party:

Have an intentional 24-7 suffering party (temporarily)


suffering permission:

If it’s safe, (try) give(ing) yourself permission to suffer (maybe implicitly/just so or for a (semi-)explicit block of now-to-future time.


drama and non-drama:

Be dramatic. Do the same thing but be non-dramatic while you’re doing it.


explore intertemporal self-consistency:

Incline towards your present talking collaboratively to the present. (present-present)
Incline towards your past talking collaboratively to your past. (past-past)
Incline towards your future talking collaboratively to your future. (future-future)
Incline towards your present talking collaboratively to your past. (present-past)
Incline towards your present talking collaboratively to your future. (present-future)
Incline towards your future talking collaboratively to your past. (future-past)


fantasy ideal maybe with realistic swapping:

Imagine a fantasy ideal that would make everything ok. Try swapping in more realistic elements piecewise/partwise, to get closer to something you could really actualize.


solutioning dependency checking:

Ask, if X was done/complete/good/fixed would Y be done/complete/good/fixed?


contingency:

Ask, why might this/it/X not work/succeed?


otherwiseness:

Ask, might it/X/this be otherwise?


need/bad/motivated to (not) believe:

Ask, would it be bad to not believe this/X? Ask, would it be bad to believe this/X? Ask, do I have to believe this/X? Ask, do I have to not believe this?x? Ask, would it be good to believe this/X? Ask, would it be good to not believe this/X? Ask, would it be bad to not have to believe this/X? Ask…


postural pull: (m*)

Does your body want to move into a particular posture, position, leaning-ness, curled-up-ness? If yes, see if you can help yourself get into that posture. Check periodically to see if there’s a new posture to move into, next.


gestural expansiveness: (m*)

Explore large body movements of the extremities.


impartial part helping:

Assume a friendly openness. Ask a part of you, or something in you, how can I help? What do you need? (You might also ask yourself, what does this need?) What would be good for you? What’s good on your terms (in all of that), and how can I help you get that?

Before moving on to something else, you might ask, what would make it ok for me/us/you/this to pause/end/stop exploring this (for now)?


assume even worse/worst:

Assume an even worse version of the (seemingly?) bad thing that’s (seemingly?) true. Fill in all the cracks of the worse-/worst-ness. What would you do, how would you respond if this worse/worst case were true?


be a baby, be prenatal:

Let yourself be a baby. Let yourself be prenatal. The reality of that, imagined or immersive flashback. Suspend disbelief. What was that experience concretely like, good and bad?


the opposite:

Ask if there’s a part of you that believes the opposite (of this/X). Is there a part of you that believes that opposite belief, ongoingly, parallel, to the first part of you?


counterfactual replacement:

Ask, might X be ok, instead of Y? What good things would happen if X? What bad things would happen if X?


truths, etc.:

Try resting in how things seem vs how things feel vs how things appear vs what might be true or false vs what you know vs what you believe vs what you understand vs what you think vs what god would say is true vs what’s real vs what feels right vs what things look like vs what’s going on, here vs how you’d describe things vs…


forward vs backward:

Ask, is this/X forward(s) or backward(s)?


desire, etc.:

Ask, what do you long for, hope for, desire, want, care about, value, lust for/after, love—to do, be have, associate with, pursue, acquire, achieve…


philosophical meta:

Let your be pulled into thinking about metaphysics, philosophy, epistemology, phenomenology, agathology, cosmology, eschatology, mereology, linguistics…

comment:

Sometimes, often, extreme, abstract meta can be a real, nondeferrable bottleneck. You might see if you can go concrete first, if you can defer that extreme, abstract meta. You might bring in the meta protocol. But, often you relatively can’t!


alternatives explanations:

Ask, what are alternative explanations, stories for this/X apparent thing?


concrete memories:

Gently incline towards experiencing fully concrete, episodic, experiential memories.


options, pros and cons:

List some options. Consider the pros and cons of choosing each option and not choosing each option. (So every option will have its own collection of pros and cons. And then you might juxtapose the pros and cons of pairs of options, and so on.)


trigger yourself:

Expose yourself (carefully) to things that provoke extreme reactions. If you are accidentally or incidentally triggered, take advantage of it.


intuition:

Temporarily let yourself [come to] know (or understand) without dictating the why of how you know or the how of how you know. (cf. radically unstructured coming to know/understand.)


counterfactual past additions:

What would it have been good to experience, at any point when you were younger, in the recent or distant past? How might that have gone? What was the experience, maybe sight, sound, touch, taste, smell, feel, meaning…


memory/imagination triggering:

Through memory, imagination, or imaginative riffs, trigger yourself, distress yourself.


urges and impulses:

Feel ongoing and the bleeding-edge arising edges of impulses, urges, impellment, compellment, compulsion


three-dimensional, unforced scanning:

Slowly explore the surface and physical interiority of the body with attention. Don’t force attention to where attention doesn’t easily go or where it slides away. Let it go; it will surely open up later, and you will surely come back to it later, possibly effortlessly and costlessly folded into something else.



be gross: (h)

be disgusting, be rotten, be foul


notice expectations: (h)

thus


drop expectations: (h)

thus, if you can


just do what you gotta do: (h)

thus


eat the shadow: (s)

thus


awareness of space, time, possibility: (h)

experiment with noticing or becoming aware of [for example]

- the space between you and the screen
- the space behind you
- the whole room, the whole building, different rooms in the building, the air ducts
- the sky, the ground, subterranean matter/strata, the insides of objects/furniture, the insides of your body
- the boundary of your spatial awareness, whatever it is

- the past few moments
- the next few moments
- today, as a whole, with “now” contextually embedded in it
- this year, as a whole, with “now” contextually embedded in it
- the continuous arc of time that connected/connects a given memory to the present
- the boundary of your temporal awareness, whatever it is

- what is happening
- what could be happening in a few seconds
- what could be happening in a day
- what could be happening in a year
- the continuous arc of possibility that connects the present to an imagined future
- the boundary of your awareness of possibility, whatever it is


imagine variants: (h)

imagine ways something could be slightly or radically different


more body do: (h)

continue doing what you’re doing, but see if it’s good to involve some other part of your body in it


be loved: (h)

let yourself, all parts of yourself, just like this, be loved by yourself or by another, real or imaginary


safe shame: (h)

let it be ok to be ashamed


safe fear: (a)

thus


safe rage: (a)

thus


safe joy: (a)

thus


safe grief: (a)

thus


safe turn-on: (a)

thus


pretend up is down and down is up: (mo)

thus


notice care: (h)

notice things people do to care for each other, even/especially unspoken, routine, small, mundane, subtle, or trivial things


explore subtle posture: (h)

subtly slowly carefully shift your posture, exploring all degrees of freedom therein


minimum enjoyable wiggle: (a)

changing as little as possible, move in a way that feels good.

comment:

use with care -- extremely psychoactive. Move either body or mind or both.


yesterday: (h)

recall yesterday and what’s good & bad about what happened yesterday


tomorrow: (h)

consider tomorrow and what’s good & bad about what might happen tomorrow


today: (h)

reflect on today and what’s good & bad about today


pleasure: (h)

seek out or summon pleasure, here & now, as something to study or to simply enjoy


reflective posture: (h)

find a posture/position that feels good/better


vocalize: (h)

vocalize freely and spontaneously


be animal: (h)

be wild, primal, animal

comment:

doesn’t necessarily imply/require being in a high-energy state. animals grieve, too, etc


treat yourself: (h)

treat yourself to something nice. you deserve it!


remember next weekend: (mo)

you did so many things next weekend! it was such a time. think of all the things you did and didn't do next weekend, and how you felt when they were happening.


be perfectly still: (h)

find a comfortable position and be perfectly still, for as long as it feels good


dormant energy: (h)

notice, look for, or summon dormant energy


rhythmic movement: (h)

move your body in a rhythmic way that feels good, for as long as it feels good


examine details: (h)

thus


try on mythologies of yourself: (h)

without becoming attached to them, explore coming up with grand narratives to explain patterns and connections between possibly seemingly unrelated aspects of yourself, your life, your history, your plans, and your relationship to the world


value build-up: (n)

Imagine yourself getting dropped into the world, naked and alone. What values/needs need to get covered? Imagine you covered them. What values appear next? At some point start adding new people to the world, one by one, and notice how this affects your value landscape.


meditation + physical activity: (h)

gently incline toward meditating or doing an/any aux practice while engaging in a physical activity like stretching, yoga, walking/jogging, or dancing


backwards: (a)

Reverse “I must do X to get my mind state Z” to “How might I get my mind in state Y so that X is the natural thing to do?”


violence: (a)

Let yourself feel how it would feel to do the violence you already want to do.

comment:

Allow waves of anger, shame, doing-it-wrong, doesn’t-work-for-me, fear, sadness, satisfaction, arousal to cycle faster or slower than you expect.  Allow false starts and false stops.


sit quietly in a room alone: (jd)

thus

comment:

Cf: "All of humanity's problems stem from man's inability to sit quietly in a room alone" - Blaise Pascal


let yourself have opinions: (jd)

Thus


be entitled to your feelings: (h)

thus


ask your "stupid" questions: (jd)

Thus


go see a therapist: (jd)

therapist/healer/coach/etc


cross train: (d)

do X as cross training for meditation

comment:

Practice eating ramen. Train for eating ramen. Eat ramen while distracted. Sit back and gently attend to yourself as you let yourself eat ramen. Let the while of your being become the eating of ramen. God I hope Costco has ramen in stock


practice/train: (d)

practice doing x. Train the doing of x.


unpractice: (d)

do x while distracted, remember how you did it. Sit back and gently attend to yourself as you let yourself do x. Completely immerse yourself in doing x/flow/your whole being becomes the doing of x


be as irritated as you are, no more or less: (*mo)

thus


be no less X than you are: (m)

thus


be no more X than you are: (m)

thus


ask for help (solo): (jd)

While meditating or otherwise engaged in personal practice, ask for help. Who the ask is directed to may vary per your aesthetics and beliefs. Consider that you might be asking god, or perhaps the deeper parts of yourself, or perhaps no one, or perhaps...

Sentence stems could be: "how do I ...?", or "help me (with)...?"

E.g. "how do I be with this anxiety in a good way?", or "help me be with this anxiety in a good way", or "how do I solve this problem?"


use profanity to describe things: (m)

thus


be profane: (h)

thus


FUCK SHIT DICK CUNT: (h)

THUS, YOU FUCKING ASSHOLE


go all-in on whatever’s happening right now: (h)

thus, with four-part harmony & feeling


explore and rest in points/manifolds of disconnection: (h)

thus

comment:

disconnection from self, feelings, desires, other people, pain, memories, etc etc


ok to escape, ok to hide: (h)

let it be ok to hide, from others, from the world, or from yourself; let it be ok to escape, into a room or into your mind


be with experience in a good way: (jd)

Thus


meta-thinking: (h)

what's good to think about? what makes it good? what's bad to think about? what makes it bad?


stop thinking: (jd)

Cut it out. Seriously, don’t do that. You don’t know what you’re getting yourself into. Quit while you’re ahead...


instajudge: (mo)

flip a coin. Heads is good, tails is bad. For every thought you have in the next minute, judge it accordingly. Ask yourself what difference that makes.


accepting resistance: (mo)

if something is so (particularly internally) and you wish it weren't, speak to your resistance and say, eg:
"I know you don't want me to feel worthless, but right now I do."


find your voice: (h)

thus


be alone: (h)

thus, for as long as it’s good to be, wherever and in whatever way it’s good to be


seek help: (h)

thus


rest in selfhood: (h)

thus


follow your instincts: (h)

thus


here & not here: (h)

Notice the ways that you’re here, now. Notice the ways that you’re not quite here, or not quite now. Don’t try to change anything, yet.


hakuna matata: (mo)

attempt to find a problem and observe that there are none


I still can't find a fucking problem anywhere: (mo)

give voice to the part of you that wishes things were somehow problematic.


peers and nonpeers: (h)

what makes someone your peer (your equal) or not your peer? what is the nature of your differences? what would it mean to be everyone’s peer?


how are you doing?: (h)

what’s your honest answer, the answer that you want to say, somewhere, but that you might not say to any actual person were they to ask?


sit with the question "what if I'm wrong?": (*mo)

thus


too much, too little: (h)

ask, what is there too much of? what is there too little of? what shouldn’t be here at all? what’s missing?


everything is ok: (h)

imagine a (possibly alternate/parallel) world where everything is ok. go into it, feel it, be there.


mourn: (h)

thus


forget: (d)

thus


yawn. like a huge frikken yawn where you stretch your whole body and it's super satisfying: (d)

thus


pushing & pulling: (h)

notice where you’re pushing. notice where you’re being [naturally] pulled.


what is this drug?: (mx)

If I were on a drug right now, what would it be called? Is this a good trip or a bad trip?


watch for reactivity: (h)

thus


DIY p3 and/or p8: (h)

Make new versions of the lists in p3 and/or p8 for yourself, based on your own experiences.


best attention: (h)

Gently, dreamily seek the best place/orientation/position for your attention, right now.


pay atentionto detail: (d)

Thus.


own your shit: (h)

Own your fucking shit: your problems, your grievances, your situation, your past, your feelings, your mistakes. They’re yours. Own them.

And while you’re at it: your achievements, your skills, your friendships, your future, your potentiality, your pride, your worth. They’re yours. Own them.


confront it gently: (h)

Try confronting it in a very slow, easy, gentle way.


taxonomize phenomena: (h)

Explicitly, provisionally taxonomize/categorize the relevant thing(s) 


be fluid: (h)

Be fluid, supple, yielding.


disobey: (h)

Thus.


go orthogonal: (h)

Consider the axis defined by what you’re doing (or trying to do) and its opposite. now go in an orthogonal direction.


intention shaping: (h)

Play with and perfect your intention.


only action: (h)

stream of consciousness for doing — don’t think or plan, just [safely] act in the world, for a bit.


dream big: (h)

Thus.


be generous: (h)

Be generous and charitable, literally or metaphorically.


look for what’s missing:

Thus.


compose a will: (h)

Compose a last will and testament, even a brief or incomplete or inadequate one.


befriend: (h)

Try befriending it.


wrong: (h)

Directly ask, what might I be wrong about?


disconnected value: (m)

Ask, what things do I seem to value that seem totally disconnected from the other things I value?

comment:

Main one I'm familiar with is "family".


the big picture: (h)

Consider the big picture, or a bigger picture.


identify the different forces at play: (h)

Thus.


repeat an error: (h; gpt-3)

Deliberately do something that embarrassingly backfires or leads to an embarrassing or inappropriate response.


repeat a success: (h; gpt-3)

Deliberately do something that leads to positive or satisfying results.


reverie/daydream: (h; gpt-3)

Let your mind wander in whatever direction it wants to.


focus on what feels best/worst/neutrally good/bad: (h; gpt-3)

Thus.


focus on the good/bad of a past event: (h; gpt-3)

Thus.


concentrate on something to the exclusion of all else: (h; gpt-3)

Thus and notice subtle or gross wavering or interjection.


engage in overt positive/negative self-talk: (h; gpt-3)

Thus.


engage in covert positive/negative self-talk: (h; gpt-3)

Thus.


allow yourself to be emotionally affected (be susceptible): (h; gpt-3)

comment:

Be empathetic for example.


allow yourself to be intellectually influenced (be vulnerable): (h; gpt-3)

Notice and allow for an influence on or by your thoughts and/or emotions. 


losing control: (h; gpt-3)

Experiment with losing control. Have it, enjoy it. Then, let it go.


masturbate: (h; gpt-3)

Thus.


origins and name: (h; gpt-3)

Ask what’s the origin of X/that? What’s the name of X/that?


all of it: (h; gpt-3)

Ask, is it all of it?


balanced perspective: (h; gpt-3)

Ask to be balanced in your perspective. Can you see the good, bad, and ugly of X/that?


totality: (h; gpt-3)

Be a totality, or “everything.”


offer help, accept help: (h; gpt-3)

Thus.


do something that will definitely work

Thus.


funny laugh: (h; gpt-3)

Curiously, genuinely explore what happens if you try to laugh from your deepest place.


try on new identities: (h; gpt-3)

If you’re not sure what your identity is, or if you’re not sure if you have an identity, try on some identities. Test them. See how they fit.


get curious about what’s going on inside you: (h; gpt-3)

Go meta, get curious about what’s going on inside you.

Comment: There are lots of ways i can know something, like knowing something consciously (i.e. thinking about it), knowing something implicitly like a word in a language that i don’t know consciously but know implicitly, or knowing something unconsciously like how i can know that i know how to type without actually being able to recall any of the details of how i learned how to type.


deeper than that: (h; gpt-3)

Ask, is there something deeper than that?

undo: (h; gpt-3)

Ask, how might I undo this or undo its effects?


not neutral: (h; gpt-3)

Ask, what isn’t neutral about this?


footsteps: (h; gpt-3)

Imagine being a friend to yourself, following your footsteps, the path you took to get to where you are right now. Maybe that friend can point out, here’s the right decision, here’s the one you regret, here’s the thing you’ll be sorry about later, here’s the fork in the road, here’s the leap of faith you took, here’s the thing you should have said, here’s the way you got it right, here’s the way you got it wrong, here’s how you could have gotten it right.


not the only thing: (h; gpt-3)

Ask, what are three other things like this?

how do you experience things: (h; gpt-3)

How do you experience the experience? How do you experience the experience of the experience?


private wisdom: (h; gpt-3)

Ask, what is the wisdom you have that you can’t talk about? (That you are unable to say out loud.)


responding and initiating: (h; gpt-3)

Explore the difference between responding and initiating.


error message: (h; gpt-3)

Give yourself an error message.


other people’s minds: (h; gpt-3)

Imagine you/your self (or someone else) suddenly and without warning enters someone else’s mind. Imagine the sensation of that sudden entrance. What would you see, hear, feel? Was that terrifying? What about relieving?

camouflage: (h; gpt-3)

How are you in camouflage? What are you in camouflage from?


what is the model here?: (h; gpt-3)

What is the implicit or explicit model here? What would it mean/be like if that were to change? (Or to be obliterated?)


just go with it and see what happens: (h)

Thus.


keep doing what you're doing until there is something better to do (without necessarily specifically looking for some better thing): (h)

Thus.


opposite: (q)

Along whatever axes seem important, do the opposite of what you normally do.

comment:

reversed stupidity may not be intelligence but it is search


create affordance: (d)

Can you turn impossibility into possibility, even if it's with the knowledge you'd never do it?


active & passive thinking: (h)

Incline toward noticing whether thoughts are “actively thought” or “passively/spontaneously arise”


implications/inferences:

Ask, what are the implications/inferences?


presuppositions:

Ask, what are the presuppositions?


premises:

Ask, what are the premises?


conclusions(s):

Ask, what's the conclusion? What are the conclusions?


upstream implicatoins/inferences:

Ask, what implies this?


mechanism:

Ask, what causes this? Ask, what does this cause? Ask, what's going on, here, and, how does this work? Ask, where is the causing, starting, stopping, preventing, blocking, enabling? Ask, what exists, here? Ask, what's present? Ask, what's absent?


intrinsic motivation:

Ask, as far as I can tell, right now, what is my most non-fear-based intrinsic motivation behind doing or wanting this?


someone else:

Ask, do you have an expectation of someone else being there? Ask, who else is there? Ask, how do you know the difference(s) between you and them?


first feel:

What's the immersive feel of the first experience you had that eventually participated as part of a collection of evidence for this/X?


age:

How old are you being right now? What are all the ages that you're being right now? What's the feel of all the different ages you're being right now?


spend time with the parts that feel younger:

Thus.


how:

How are you doing any particular thing that you’re doing? Are there different ways? Is there an opposite way yet with the same intention?


let it come to you:

Thus, and instead of going there or making it happen, let it/them/X come to you.


exhaustivity:

Gently, exhaustively, explore all of it. Anything left? Is that all of it? And again? And more? And more? Anything else? Is that all of it?


binaries and mutual exclusivities:

What's the that to this this, or the not this to this this? With nothing in between? (Or, ask, what's the mutually exclusive and exhaustive list?)


nebulous counting:

Without making there be discrete things, gently try to count and maybe list all the things. Allow any indeterminacy to be as it is. You might talk about that indeterminacy, but you don't have to.


enumerating nebulous pushing:

Gently count all the ways you're pushing. Don't try to force-dispel any nebulosity. Allow any indeterminacy to be as it is. For each one or any or all nebulous sense, you might ask if it's productive or unproductive.


start time:

Ask, when did it/that/X start?


slowly:

Do X really, really, really, really slowly.


first or already:

What’s your first inclination with respect to what to do with X and/or what are you already preflectively doing with respect to X? You might gently distinguish between these two, if they're both present, and put an name to each or describe each.


delta:

Ask, what's the delta between then and now? What's the difference? What's changed?

comment:

"Then" and "now" can be milliseconds apart of years apart.


knowns:

Ask, what are the known knowns?
Ask, what are the known unknowns?
Ask, how might I know the good to know, knowable, currently unknown, not-yet-knowns?


give up how:

Give up the "how" of how something needs to happen.


ask for help: (j)

Thus.


necessary connections:

Ask, is this/it/X necessarily connected or contingently connected?


body questions:

Ask particular patches, regions, surface, parts, interiorities, volumes of your body questions. What are you? What’s good for you? What’s happening here? Who are you? Who are you being? What do you want? How can I help you? Do you have anything to tell me? What do you need?


spacious eye relaxation:

Look down at a wide open field and “release your eyes” until you get that zoom/parallax effect that eventually fades or runs out. 


seek sensory wonder in the "external" world:

Thus.

comment:

https://twitter.com/meaningness/status/1260943613833302017?s=21 (last accessed: 2020-08-31) “agendaless involvement in sensory fascination”


intend versus will:

Explore whether which words feel better: "will," "willing," "intend," "intending," "intention", ...


need imagining: (m*)

Ask yourself to show you the need in full.

a) imagine never getting the opportunity to have [thing] again
b) imagine this thing not actually being the thing you need
c) imagine not even wanting this thing, or needing it, and being fine


walk five miles:

Thus.


why not already:

Ask, why hasn’t this sort of automatically metabolized itself already?


safe to know, to understand, to look, to be able to tell:

Ask, how might I make it safe to know it/this/X? Ask, how might I make it safe to understand it/this/X? Ask, how might I make it safe to look at it/this/X? Ask, how might I make it safe to be able to tell (if) X/it/this?


solve or dissolve:

Ask, how can I safely explore ways that dissolve or solve those bad things?


right here, right now says:

Ask, what does it say that I’m having this experience right here, right now? Ask, what does all this (sense/content/everything) say about everything else?


let a bodypart come to you:

Thus, e.g., let your feet come to you; let your legs come to you, and so on.

comment:

This is in contrast to "going TO something" e.g. with your head, with your attention, etc.


waiting, here and now, things come to you, periphery:

Patiently, gently wait, inclining towards and resting in the here and now, and let perhaps subtle things come to you, maybe from the periphery.


waiting, raw/bare sensations, things come to you, periphery:

Patiently, gently, maybe quietly wait, inclining towards and resting in raw/bare sensations, and let perhaps subtle things come to you, maybe from the periphery.


waiting, one point, things come to you, periphery:

Patiently, gently maybe quietly wait, inclining towards and resting in raw/bare sensations, and let perhaps subtle things come to you, maybe from the periphery.


waiting, everything, things come to you, periphery:

Patiently, gently maybe quietly wait, inclining towards and resting in everything, and let perhaps subtle things come to you, maybe from the periphery.


have a despair party:

Thus. And, give up, fail, let go.


have a negative emotion party:

Thus.


spatially localized attention conceived as such: (tcs)

Put attention on/in specific spatial points/volumes/voxels inside and outside the body.


"external world":

Allow the "external world" to become salient, e.g. sounds, or a particular sight or sound, etc., everything out there, as/while things might become quieter internally. Let it come to you.


"take a snapshot":

Take a snapshot of an experience that's too fast, too transient, to explore direclty and then examine the snapshot.

comment:

You might anticipate or preemptively "hit the button" a little before you want the snapshot, metaphorically speaking, so as to account for a metaphorical delay in button press and shutter speed.


primary and secondary attention:

Explore things with "secondary attention," too.

comment:

Be careful not to inappropriately reify primary and secondary attention, awareness, etc.. Secondary attention can be analogous to peripheral vision. If one stably foviates on an object one can stably track things in peripheral vision. Similarly, if one somewhat stably maintains primary attention on something (or looks "through" a primary object, as per e.g. Culadasa, one can explore and track things in secondary attention (Culdasa's "awareness").


meditation not conceptualized as such:

Meditate without conceptualizing it as meditation. (cf. "anything but meditation")


erroneous conception:

Explore how you might be conceiving of something erroneously, e.g. false dichotomies, binaries, etc.


counterfactual past futures:

For something that ended in the past, imagine a continuing future for that thing, where there was no ending. What happens next? And then? And then?

comment:

You might try this for relationships that ended.


similarities in possible future plans:

For different things you might do in the future, careers, lives, plans, explore the superficial and non-superficial similarities between them. In what shallow and deep ways are they similar, even if it's not immediately apparent?


proximal and concrete alternatives:

Ask, is there a more direct way to get X? Can you just directly have that right now or proximally and if not why not?


concrete first steps:

Ask, what are some concrete first steps to move towards this fantasy/ideal/desire/goal?

comment:

Sometimes exploring concretes will introduce concerns and contingencies that can "bleed into" fantasies, ideals, etc., making them seem less good or possible. Sometimes that's helpful and sometimes that's not! In either case, it can be good to be aware that that's happening.


goal loops:

Ask, how does X lead to Y, in your plans and dreams? Ask, also, how does Y lead to X, in your plans and dreams?

comment:

Sometimes X and Y are too monolithic and circularly dependent, and exploring circular dependencies can cause helpful "ontological refactorings" in goals, actions, desires, etc.


real/my version: (xx)

For desires, goals, ideas, beliefs that you've acquired, that seem "grafted on" or in the "wrong ecology" or wrong landscape, ask, what's the real version of this? What's my version of this?

Further, ask, what’s deep-down truly good (feels good, actually wanted) about this for me?


fantasy forward:

Carry a fantasy forward--for past things and future things and dreams, that maybe ended early or didn't happen at all, especially things that you revisit or feel stuck, you might ask, what would/could happen next? And then? Is there a way this (version) ends or completes? How?


same world:

Ask, can this all be brought into the same world?


milliseconds before:

Ask, what's happening 600ms before that? 200ms? 100ms? 50? 10?


milliseconds first:

Ask, what's happening in the first 10ms? The first 100ms?


give it directly to yourself:

See if you can give X to yourself, directly-ish, to yourself, from you to you, right now.

Or, if something Y is only getting you part of the thing you want, see if you can give *the rest* to yourself, to make up the difference.


what already having would be like:

Explore the felt goodness of what it would be like to already have something that you want.

Explore the felt goodness of what it would be like to completely have something that you're only partially getting or only partially have, now.


badness of not:

Gently and/or imaginatively feel into the felt badness of not doing X.


causal history join:

Ask, where does the causal history of these two things join in the past?


intellectual/immersive recollection:

If you're "top-down, intellectually recalling" something. See if you might find a "bottom-up, immersive feel" for that same memory/event/situation/etc.


upstream causal intervention:

If you want something to change, explore how you might do something "upstream" that then naturally/effortlessly/spontaneously causes the more "downstream" change that you started with.


what you're already paying attention to:

Pay attention to what you're already paying attention to, reflectively or otherwise.


bring to you:

Bring breath, body, sounds, etc., to you, maybe so much so that sounds temporarily get drowned out.


interest, boredom, curiousity:

Take interest, boredom, and curiousity seriously.


see what your mind is arleady doing:

Explore, watch, feel into what your mind is already doing, before adding/doing new things.


look for what you're not supposed to know:

Thus.


riding a bike:

Treat meditation like learning to ride a bike.


meditate like: (xx)

Meditate like an athlete, a painter, like you're on vacation...


loose, tall, still:

Be gently, sensitively both loose and tall and relatively still. Find a way to gently do this for an extended period of time.


talk about the right thing to do in practice:

If it feels safe, talk about what the right thing to do is or feels like, in terms of personal practice.


be open to the possibility of miracles: (j)

Remain/be/become open to the possibility of miracles, instantaneous change/transformation/growth.


coordinate with breathing: (h)

Try coordinating what you're doing with the breath, or pay attention to if/how what you're doing relates to or interacts with the breathing cycle.


consider doing something else: (ct)

Thus.


slow down: (j)

Thus.


check your notifications: (h)

Thus.


watch porn: (h)

Thus.


spend an hour on facebook/twitter/reddit/instagram/etc: (h)

Thus.


zone out: (h)

Thus.


scroll through p/a list without doing any: (m)

Thus.


do not do this practice: (d)

Thus.


best order: (h)

Ask, what is the best order to do things in, assuming a best global order exists?


explain using different words: (h)

Explain something [see p/a practice “explain something”], then explain it again using different words. considering “tabooing” certain key words (making them off-limits for the purpose of the explanation)

OR [see next practice]


explain in a new way: (h)

Explain something in a way you’ve never explained it before.


rest in freely available, no-strings-attached goodness: (h)

Thus.


find contention: (h)

Deliberately seek out contention/conflict/resistance/against-ness [wrt X]


start over: (h)

Stop. Take a break, or not. Start again.


logical endpoint: (h)

Ask, what is the logical or most likely endpoint here, given everything i know?


systematically recount: (jd)

Systematically recount moments/times/events(/places?) from your life. For example: every time you've had sex, every time you've had a piece of pizza, every relationship you've been in, every tree you've sat under, etc.


offer 1%: (aj)

See whether something in the body wants something: e.g. to squeeze the legs together, to raise an arm protectively or in preparation to stab down.
Offer 1% of that, do the first millimeter or less, and completely experience that first millimeter.  Notice how it feels and what if anything happens to the desire to do that particular thing.

comment:

Don’t overdo it: if doing so activated your system then only a little into it before resting. This is something like opening the “Print Queue” of actions that got added to the queue and were not carried out, either because they were inhibited or didn’t fire in time because something was happening too fast, or something came up before they could find their natural completion.  There is a happy percentage (e.g. 1%) that might allow the print queue to clear out, without triggering whatever inhibitted the action in the first place and made it “stuck”.


find missing concepts: (jd)

Take note of concepts people talk about that you seem to be “missing.” Explore the ways you might not actually be missing them, or already have full or partial versions of the thing. Scratch: And over time, track how experiences you have or are having may be that thing
example: “everyone talks about love all the time but I don’t seem to have any!” Love, forgiveness, gratitude, the experience of “missing someone”, etc etc


call your mom: (mo)

Thus.


call your dad: (mo)

Thus.


notice obstruction: (h)

Ask, which processes, rhythms, or movements are being obstructed?


hate:

Thus.


empty justifications:

Check to see whether the things you’re saying to yourself are empty justifications, and whether there’s something deeper and truer underneaeth.


weighty feeling/memory:

Explore whether there are feelings and memories from the past that are “carrying real weight” right now.


let your body solve it:

Let your body solve the parameter/combinatorial explosion; calculate with the body (with secondary concern/consideration/error-checking input from the mind)

comment:

…like water knowing the shape of a container as it’s poured in, or a thermose knowing whether to keep something hot or cold.


body and head:

Let both body and head “test/check for done”/yes/no/good/bad/etc.


X milliseconds before:

Explore the first X (10, 20, 50, 100, 500) milliseconds before something.


first X milliseconds:

Explore the first X (10, 20, 50, 100, 500) milliseconds of something.


deciding border:

Explore the nebulous border between haven’t decided to meditate yet and having decided to meditate, at the millisecond level (or tens or hundreds of milliseconds).


meditating border:

Explore the nebulous (or not) temporal border between not (yet) meditating and now meditating, at the millisecond level (or tens or hundreds of milliseconds).


finer grain:

Seek and/or explore and/or work at a finer grain.


try treating change like digital logic:

Consider that some particular change won't occur until something is perfect down to the bits, every single one and zero correct. Consider that some particular change won't occur until *everything* relevant to that change is in place, neither too few things there nor too many things. So, not, overshooting or undershooting, but the right particular, specific, concrete presences and absences, fractally, recursively. So not, "generally more or less," but "this and not that."


note sense of safety: (aj)

Thus.

comments:

Are you experiencing felt physical safety or not?  If not, why?/good to look at why?/make it safe to look and then look.  Assess other levels: emotional safety, future safety, lingering past safety, security at all levels and beyond levels


hold self-distrust: (mo)

Incline towards the question "in what ways don't I trust myself?" Attend to what arises, and encourage yourself to trust yourself exactly as much as it makes sense to trust yourself.

comments:

A:
this has been v valuable to me. or rather, the way i initially interpreted it, which is instead of dismissing self-mistrust when it arises, validating/legitimizing it by exploring the reasons the mistrust actually "has a point" so to speak
B:
Yes! That's very much the intention for it
I've been developing a whole framework based on this shift from dismissing to validating, and would love to hear as much as you want to share about your experiences with it
Vital to actually building self-trust
And applies on all scales, eg to other people, as well
A:
Yes! Totally. There’s an important tension here around “trusting our mistrust”


manifest rage at self: (mr)

if it is safe and good to do so, and only to the degree it is safe and good to do so, manifest rage at self. roar. yell obscenities at self. vocalize any relevant parts' felt rage at you.


mine not mine: (mo*, jd*)

What's mine to do? What's not mine to do? What of the undone is mine to do next?


unblocking via movement: (aj)

What's here? How does it want to move? Is there a reason it hasn't done that already, or is it safe to do the first speck of that movement?


hide under a blanket:

Thus.

comment:

Meditator used hide under a blanket. It's not very effective.


explain yourself to a small child: (mh)

Imagine being followed around by a young,  inquisitive child who is requesting clear and sensible explanations for everything you do.


set a good example: (mh)

Imagine that your behavior is on display for a group of children in [age range], and that they'll be inclined to use your behavior as a model for their own.


make a bucket list: (jd)

Thus.


vocalize an opinion: (jd)

Thus, perhaps out loud to yourself, perhaps out loud to another.


vocalize a (seeming) truth: (jd)

Thus.


articulate an opinion: (jd*)

Thus, maybe write it down, put it into words.


articulate a (seeming) truth: (jd()

Thus, maybe write it down, put it into words.


toggle worldviews: (mh)

Toggle between good and bad.  Pure land and charnel ground.  Toggle faster.  Toggle slower.


what are the options?: (jd)

What are the options, besides diving into the big feel directly?


mortality/fragility party:

Have a mortality/fragility party.


24-7 mortality/fragility party:

Have a 24-7 mortality/fragility party.


uncertainty party:

Have a uncertainty party.


24-7 uncertainty party:

Have a 24-7 uncertainty party.


(no escape from) actually/really/truly caring/wanting/desiring party:

Have a (no escape from) actually/really/truly caring/wanting/desiring party.


24-7 (no escape from) actually/really/truly caring/wanting/desiring party:

Have a 24-7 (no escape from) actually/really/truly caring/wanting/desiring party.


paranoia party:

Have a paranoia party.


24-7 paranoia party:

Have a 24-7 paranoia party.


horror/terror/fear party:

Have a horror/terror/fear party.


24-7 horror/terror/fear party:

Have a 24-7 horror/terror/fear party.


would it be fun?: (*)

Ask, would it/that/X be fun?


have you tried enjoying it?: (*)

Ask, have you tried enjoying it?


perceive with body part X:

Thus.


what body part X wants:

Ask, what does body part X want?


origin:

Ask, what within was the origin that gave rise to multiple X’s?


look without looking:

Ask, is there a way to look at it without looking at it? A way to circle around to to be indirect?


look without pushing and periphery:

Ask, is there a way to attend without pushing, and then to attend and then see if things come up on the periphery?


adult/new/old percentages:

Ask, what is percent is new and adult and even “received”? What percent is “old/young/deep”?


light intention:

See if you can place a light intention in whatever global way is good.


age:

Ask, does that feel like you or part of you or a state you were in or could have been in, at any particular age, in your past or in your life so far?


after infinite self-care:

Ask, if you had infinite time for self-care, if time stood still while you did that, when you were done, what might you concretely do next, after that?


subtle energy:

Move “[subtle] energy” in and along your body (minimally and conservatively, though perhaps in a bunch of places.


really/actually/truly want: (*)

Ask, what do you really/actually/truly want?


starting over:

Ask, what if you were starting over, right now? If you were airdropped into a new life? What would you do differently?