teaching.txt

There’s a hard thing, here, where, provisionally, I think “meditation teaching” or “teaching meditation” should be this really organic thing that involves the totality of a person, with a huge overlap with “just being a kind person acting how they’d normally act, generally, in life.”

But, then, to my mind, in order to be safe and effective in this role, to my mind, that involves many thousands of hours (ten thousand? fifteen thousand? thirty thousand? I’m not there, yet, for the latter ones.) of personal practice, as well as sort of organically getting drawn to such a role, maybe having loosely, previously planned to go in that direction, maybe not.

To my mind, there’s a confluence of personal practice and something like the “many protocol,” where these two things together provide an “omnidirectional driver” for (always provisionally) deeply understanding people and (imperfectly) doing the right thing, next, in each moment, that is useful/good/something, for the other person, out of an effectively infinite set of possible next things to do. Personal practice provides deep “models” of oneself, that are partially, proactively generalizable to other people, for both “mundane” stuff (very, very broadly speaking) as well as even more generalizable “models” that eventually touch “the absolute” (eh, misnomer, but, etc.) which also to other people, a bit more cleanly. And the “many protocol” teaches how to do the right things with those models, in context. And then doing this with as many people as possible, as much as possible, plus more personal practive, makes one better and better (safer, more effective, less error prone, less rocky, less tail risk for self and other) when doing the thing. Like with a bunch of other mastery tracks (not all), there’s probably no skill ceiling. One can get better and better at teaching meditation, forever. I have a long, long way to go. (Of course, “teaching meditation,” is also “just” gently poking people [and helping them with blocks] until they are first meditating regularly on their own and then, second, they reach “escape velocity” [at a velocity that works for them], helping them to unstick from ineffective and unsafe meditation behaviors, suggesting conceptual errors, providing inroads through collaborating on “impossible” personal problems, and, ok, tons and tons of stuff, a whole-person, person-complete interaction.)

And, but, so, anyway, how to “teach meditation teaching,” if at all? How to “train meditation teachers,” if at all? Why not just “let the thing happen,” in it’s own time, for people who organically head in that direction, and so on? Even if it takes thousands of hours or people make mistakes along the way? Why not just hands off or work with a few people individually? Without making it into “a thing”(tm)?

First the why, then the how:

I’ve been thinking about scaling. I’d like more people to be meditating, for people for whom it’s really, truly, deep-down good for. And, at least in my first-pass imagination, one way to scale is to teach two people, who each teach two people, who each teach two people, and so on. (two people, or five people, or whatever) This seems fine, even if there’s a two to twenty year lag, between the time a person starts meditating and they start teaching (if that’s the route they take—only some people will teach, of course). It’s just slow, and slow might be ok.

I do think slow is the only way it can work. But it can sort of be “slow and slow” (if there’s no support for meditation teaching, on the front-end) or “slow and smooth,” if there’s a bit more support for easing into teaching/helping/facilitating/interacting with others around meditation, while learning to meditate and being and intermediate and advanced practioner, in personal practice.

So that’s sort of part of the why. I’d like more people to know about effective meditation to personally meditate (for all sorts of reasons that I maybe won’t go into, here.)

Another “why” is that I think people who are thinking about meditation teaching, early on, even if it only ends up being a tiny part of what they do in the future, will become better practioners in their own personal practice as well as being able to much more effectively learn from anyone they might be “getting taught” from. It gets people to see it from all sides, including a facilitation of “taking oneself as object,” at least a little bit, in profitable ways. And all of those things can be motivating and “unsticking,” depending on where someone is in their practice. Not everyone will “need” this or non-marginally benefit from it, but, for some people, it could be extremely helpful.

Also, interacting with people around meditation is partially coextensive with helping people in other ways as well as just interacting with people in safe/fun/good/constructive/collaborative/whatever/etc ways. It’s cost-effective, as it were, to add in at least a little bit of “meditation teacher training” into people’s personal practice; to do otherwise might “leave money on the table,” much of the time. There’s some additional value there, at good cost, alll things being equal, probably.

That’s a bunch of partial “whys,” with at least one pointer out—I didn’t say *why* I want more people to meditate. (There is a more personal “why,” which is not the one I “didn’t say,” here, which is that I thought about writing a popular book and doing more personal populariziation, and, right now, for me, it just seemed exhausting—like, there are lots of things I want to do, and I don’t think one of those things is writing a popular book and then interacting with lots and lots of people, directly, around meditation, or promoting said book, and so on. Unless I have to! Maybe that’ll be a thing or I’ll do it a little bit and not a lot. In any case, I want there to be more teachers, so that if I do write a book, and twenty to hundreds of people (more?) seek me out, there will be lots of other (truly excellent, suberb) teachers I can refer them to, as quickly as possible. Because I want to scale. But I don’t want to and can’t do it alone, from zero to whatever. There needs to be smoother fan-out on the first meditation teacher node.)

Oh, another thing is that I want to maximize the chances of my stuff being useful for a very, very long time. That’s partially why I’ve written everything I have, to completely obviate myself from the teaching process, as an imperfect contingency in the event I could no longer teach (and for scaling purposes, and for facilitation of interaction with me, and for people who didn’t want to interact with me, and more). So far, I think I’ve succeeded in obviating myself, for some subset of practioners. But, I want to catch more people who can’t learn just from the document, thus my doing training and teacher training and scaling. And I want to maximize the chance of an “unbroken lineage,” even if I’ve written something clear enough that the “lineage” can be reborn from the document, if there is a period of no living practioners. I think the whole document is good enough, at the time of this writing, that this could work, and that’s a relief. But, we can do even better.

And now for some “how”:

I said that learning to teach meditation is a slow process, at least as slow as something about one’s personal practice, and that it could it could be “slow and slow” but maybe, instead, “smooth and slow.” Worst-but-still-ok case, it’ll just take of itself.

But how to get the “smooth” part?

There are pitfalls, here. There’s a danger of “baking in,” institutionalizing bad practices, in the habits, procedures, norms, whatever, as well as any “institutional culture” that grows up around such habits, procedures, norms, etc. Having an explicit personal practice document will help, I think. And/but, I’m still very sociologically naive, at this time.

My first attempts at facilitating “meditation teacher training” definitely went ok. I think everyone who participated in them will become excellent meditation teachers, if they want to. But, it seemed like, to me, that something problematic was getting “baked in,” right at the beginning. And, I’m not completely sure how to have that happen, yet. And, writing this teaching sub-document, is one first step/attempt at having something better happen, right off the bat.

There’s the interaction between something like emptiness/nebulosity/whatever and “structure” and/or possible inappropriate reification, or something. Under conditions of perfect “fluidity,” structure (norms, practices, concretes) will continuously correct itself. But, I’m not there, yet, and fledgling teachers aren’t there, yet, and the world of property, land, money, legalities, etc., isn’t there yet (ever? something?). So “flaws” can get in and persist, and hurt people, or cause a thing to self destruct, or turn an institution evil, and whatever. (Re “flaws,” not that anything is ever perfect-perfect, in some sense, ever. And/but.)

And/but, in any case, this document is a first-pass attempt at having a much better thing happen.

So, again, how to do it while mitigating the possibility of flaws, by moving forward pretty conservatively?!

(Very conservatively, is my taste, because of how terribly wrong things can sometimes go! “Conservatively” is actually the wrong model—it’s much more like go/no-go versus some graded thing. Either enough puzzle pieces acceptably seem to be in place, for right now, or they don’t. Anyway.)

Anyway, I guess, in part, by starting with some framing, starting with some explicit, shared framing, that is well-fit, situated, that works, “enough for right now.”

And that’s what this initial draft of this document is.